I have been out of work as I change careers. CalFresh has been helped me buy healthy food as I work through a difficult transition in a high priced area of the country. 
I was able to buy healthy food.
Helped out tremendously the first 2 months. Then it stopped. Don't know why. 
CalFresh has been my main source of food for the past few months. I have been able to put food on the table and don't have to worry about tomorrow's meals.
I am able to eat better than I was before I had CalFresh. It's better than asking friends and family for help. 
I have always worked and have been on my own since I was 16. I went into preterm labor 8 weeks early and was unable to work. I also didn't receive my maternity leave as expected. That's when I applied for CalFresh. 
With my EBT card, I can buy healthy food at Trader Joe's
It helped me afford healthier foods. As a working college student, it reduced my worry about food.
CalFresh was easy with the online application. It only took a few minutes and I received a little extra help with my groceries. In these hard times even a little helps a lot.
I could go back to school and not have to worry about where my next meal was coming from. 
I separated from daughter’s father and was stuck
I was too timid to apply at first. I was so thrilled to be able to eat more fruits and vegetables. I encourage anyone who needs help to apply. 
I was homeless and friend advised me of it. It has helped me so much. 
It helped me a lot but it really only allowed me to get enough food for 2 weeks since I was eating healthy food. I think it would help to be able to purchase coal and ice to keep the food fresh and also cook it
Having CalFresh available to me has definitely helped me with my monthly expenses. I am now able to cook healthy meals that I enjoy. 
I have been unemployed for 3 years after losing my job, the deaths of 2 close friends, and being hospitalized. I was struggling to even buy food. I had never applied for assistance, thinking I would never be eligible. A friend encouraged me to pursue CalFresh benefits. I am so grateful to my friend and for the CalFresh benefits I am receiving.
I was working as a fellow for the city and making just enough money to pay my rent. CalFresh allowed me to eat healthier food over the past 6 months! I wouldn't have been able to make ends meet without it.
I am able to feed myself and my son thanks to CalFresh.  
CalFresh helps me keep my home
I am a single mom with Severe Diabetic Neuropathy in my legs and feet. Social Security denied me. CalFresh has helped my son and I with purchasing food.
CalFresh helped me find stability in my routine. I could cook my own food instead of eating cheap fast food, which is important to my mental health. 
CalFresh helped me afford high quality food that keeps me healthy. Without it, I would probably be surviving on mostly fast food and sugary snacks. I'm really grateful for this program!
Without CalFresh I would have not been able to provide the basics need of my family. I am very thankful.
After receiving my EBT card, it felt like a weight was lifted off of my shoulders. Rationing my money for food became much easier and I was able to focus more on my school and work.
I am a full time volunteer for a registered non-profit/religious organization. I put in over 40 hours a week. CalFresh benefits have enabled me to continue my volunteer/spiritual work.
Thank you so much for helping me eat!
hasn't helped. you make people jump through hoops to get food it's ridiculous.
It definitely helped my family afford healthier choices.
It helped me not to rely on credit card debt for food while I look for steady income
I wasn't aware that I could be eligible. An item in my local Parks & Rec magazine in the Margaret Todd senior citizens section said CalFresh is accepted at the farmer’s market with info on how to apply. I was incurring debt to buy food. I'm on SS limited income, and I knew that things would be getting worse, not better. I qualified for $157 based on my income, etc. It felt like a miracle - to be able to buy food without the fear that I could not afford it. I'm so grateful. Please keep helping our Marin seniors who may be in the same situation.
Cal fresh allowed me to spend my limited funds on necessities other than food while I was a volunteer
CalFresh enabled me to buy groceries during a time when I had next to no money. The people in the local office in San Francisco were exceptionally helpful during the process and always responsive when I had any questions.
I was laid off with only 10 days’ notice. I had no savings. The process was easy and the people were genuinely kind and knowledgeable. I do not have a computer and I was able to hand write some of the documentation. I did not feel embarrassed reaching out for help because the process was well organized and comprehensive.
It was very helpful to have food benefits while I was in a tough situation financially despite having a job.
Before, I was unable to buy fruits and veggies since I was only able to afford the "necessary" foods such as bread and eggs. Because of CalFresh, I am now able to make healthier choices and I am less food insecure. Thank you.
Being on CalFresh has been a blessing! Even though I'm still struggling, this program has made my life less stressful... I'm very grateful, but look forward to the day that I no longer need the help!
CalFresh has helped make me less hungry
I am at an age of neither a senior citizen nor a person with a career and in her forties but, rather in my late fifties. My story is this: I had a great job, went out on a surgery to fix an injury that occurred from work. Upon being out, they laid me off after 14 years of service. I then took from my 401(k) to continue my house payments, only to drain my retirement and still end up losing my home. Upon losing my job, my home, and my retirement, I was left with nothing but a vehicle and I turned to the street.
I am grateful to the folks at CalFresh, I can literally say I was starving and have never experienced that before, not only did it open my eyes to the homeless and less fortunate, but I actually used a service that was there for people in my situation. You saw it as an emergency to get me my card. Wow — the system worked in my favor for a change! Although I'm saddened by having learned that the less fortunate are invisible to so many people. I've now been on the other side of the fence, and I am still in shock how badly people treat others who don't have anything, like we are not there. Bitter and grateful at same time. A full stomach or warm coffee made the world a better place to look at. (San Diego)
I'm able to feed my myself during this time that I'm working to find a job
It has helped me by keeping my stomach full through the month!!!!
It's helped me when I was homeless with no food
My family and I were able to eat food we otherwise wouldn't have been able to afford.
I had with a serious cancer diagnosis and was undernourished at the time. CalFresh let me count on getting good nutrition at regular intervals... I'm so sooo grateful!
This was the only way I could continue to afford food and rent while I was on unemployment. I was really hesitant to do it, but the process was easy and I got the help I needed!
Without CalFresh, I would have to decide whether I spend money on rent or food. 
CalFresh has helped me get things like fresh fruit, vegetables and dairy that I otherwise can't afford. I'm able to eat a more balanced diet. 
CalFresh really helped me while I was struggling with college and family issues. 
I moved from another state where we were on food help so I just applied here
I only get $15 a month but it is helpful because I'm on a limited income. I'm grateful for it!
"I was laid off and had good unemployment benefits, but they ran out. Not finding work left me with no income, but rent to pay, etc... The food stamps helped me get the food I needed... I'm now back to work part time... 
 but at least not going without good nutrition, which is a vital part of being as healthy as possible and to work."
It helped support my healthy eating habits and allowed me to feed my son the way I like to
It helps get some food in the house.
It's brought relief to not worry too much about my finances because I had a little help
It's been a difficult time for me after my employer passed away. It has been difficult to find a new job at my age of 61. I must say having to not worry about food all the time did help me. I could at least look forward to a hot meal after a long day of looking for work. It's what got me through some of the roughest times, cooking can be a great distraction and a joy when you can share food with friends or others less fortunate than yourself.
THANK YOU, I AM ETERNALLY GRATEFUL
Even with WIC, feeding a baby is expensive. With CalFresh I could buy food for me and him instead of just him. Before I got the card, I would struggle with "OK, I guess I'm not eating cause the cost of formula is high."
When I first started the process it was hard, people didn't always communicate well and questions were always left unanswered, but after I spoke to my worker and got the process finished it was easy to keep track and call and speak with her, though we don't have enough for the month I make ends meet, and wait for the next month when I'm able to get items I'm missing. The requirements are more stringent as the cost of living is more then we get in food stamps.
When I first applied, the process was rather smooth. My caseworker was very helpful. The day I went to the social security office I hadn't eaten so they put together a care package for me, which was very kind of them.
After being laid-off and on unemployment benefits my main concern was to cover rent as the first priority and food as the second priority. CalFresh helped with food which allowed me to put other monies toward rent. I was able to get fresh produce at my local mom and pop market which accepts EBT and it was very convenient. I also felt that by trying to stretch the dollar further I was eating a little healthier. I am thankful for the assistance.
At first I was embarrassed to ask for help. After I realized I would not have enough money to eat, I applied for help from CalFresh based on the advice from a friend. I'm glad I did, because the help I received made all the difference in the world. It took away the tremendous stress I've was under, and the utter despair I was feeling, and allowed me the time I needed to get back on my feet.
CalFresh eased some of the troubles in my mind. With CalFresh, I did not have to worry about where the next meal will be coming from since I am still actively looking for a job. All I had to do was go to the nearest grocery which supports EBT, pick and choose food items from the major food groups, and cook! Thank you, CalFresh, you are a lifesaver. My five kids and I cannot thank this program enough.
I lost my job and unemployment, went through all my savings paying for my place to live and bills. I stripped down to the bare necessities. Phone, internet and rent. The panic and uncertainty is completely debilitating!! This has helped me to be able to have a tiny security knowing I can eat.
I am a broke college student so when I applied for this it was so much help. I was only eating one meal a day because I had no food and couldn’t afford anything other than canned beans and rice. After I got CalFresh I stopped having to worry where my next meal would come from and took a lot of stress off my shoulders.
I am a freelancer here in the San Diego area and I don't always get a monthly income. There were a few days I had to skip meals in order to save for something substantial. But after being on CalFresh, I can walk into the grocery store with confidence that, yes, I can afford that salad.
"I live in a mobile home senior park in Novato, CA. Fortunately there was a visit here for our residents by CalFresh reps several months ago, and I was able to apply for EBT benefits. I am very grateful for the help that I receive. 
Lastly, I have been officially told several times that I do not need to renew my benefits for some time to come."
I started college for a career change, my car broke down, and then I lost my job. I really didn't want to get on CalFresh because of my pride but had no choice. Thanks to CalFresh, I get to eat a healthy meal every night and am now back in college.
We were going through a crisis due to my husband's inability to work because he became disabled. CalFresh enabled us to continue to eat well even when we were not sure how we were going to pay our bills. Things are going much better now but I am grateful every day for this program. 
I would have had many hungry nights without CalFresh. After paying the bills, I only have a few dollars left. With CalFresh, I didn't have to decide whether I was walking to work in the early morning or skipping dinner. 
Currently, I am on unemployment and receive about $230 a week from EDD. I have been using credit card debt to pay for things so that I have cash for my rent. I will be going back to substituting (teaching) in a few weeks which I did last school year. I made anywhere from $800 to $2800 a month with about 1K being the average.
I'm currently enrolled at UC Berkeley and my finances are very tight. I receive some money in grants and scholarships but I take out $5,000 in loans every year and I have to work part-time 10-15 hours/week. I've been doing this since my first year in college and I am now entering my final year. I come from a single parent, low-income household so I cannot ask my dad for financial help. My dad only makes $25-30K a year and he pays for health insurance, the mortgage on a house, utilities, and car expenses so I never wish to put a larger burden on him. I received EBT last year and it was extremely helpful. I was able to buy healthy groceries.
I just moved to California to get my teaching credential. I made and saved money over the summer, but it will be difficult for me to work as I have to do 15-20 hours of unpaid student teaching a week in addition to my classes. I still have to make loan payments, pay for insurance, gas, groceries, etc., in addition to the fees for tests to get my credential. I have no family support in California
I am doing a "year of service" for Habitat for Humanity and AmeriCorps. I will be building multi-family homes and tiny homes for lower-income families and the homeless. Because this is a service position I will only be provided with a very small living stipend (~$900 a month). I am a recent college graduate who just finished paying off their student loans and because of that, I don't have much money saved.
Applicant is disabled due to an undiagnosed disease so he hasn't been able to work for several months. Since he is undiagnosed, we also can't receive any extra help, nor can we afford to seek out medical treatment to get him the care he needs to get a diagnosis. We have done our best to keep our cost of living as low as possible but do have an additional $700 of expenses on top of the $1400 we spend on rent.
I was married when I came out of the closet. I couldn't get out of the marriage even though my wife long knew that I was gay so I went to my mom's. My mom couldn't accept me being gay, nor could my siblings. I left for the Bay Area. I originally planned to pay the bills driving for Uber, but my car was stolen. I have a new job, but need to wait two weeks before getting paid so I can buy basic things like food.
I'm struggling really bad, to the point of being in debt. I never have enough to eat. Ramen noodles, eggs, cereal every day, just to save up money for bills. I've been going to the hospital to see what is wrong with me, but I believe I just need to eat properly. I'm almost 22 now, and I have another year of school. I honestly don't know how I will make it if I have no family here.
I am currently applying for grad school, which is extremely expensive. We are still living in Berkeley even though we both graduated. The rent is extremely high here and we receive absolutely no financial assistance from our parents. Since we graduated from UC Berkeley this past summer, we are also no longer receiving financial aid, which has significantly impacted our ability to support ourselves. We both now work in San Francisco and transportation to and from the city every day is quite costly. We are struggling to find the extra funds to feed ourselves after paying for rent, utilities, public transit, loans, grad school applications, and everything in between.
I do not receive any financial support from my father, and my mother works tirelessly in two jobs to feed my younger brother and to help me with college. I help my mom pay the water, light and gas bills for our apartment back in southern California, and I also pay the water, gas, and light bills for my apartment here in Berkeley. Our financial situation is not the best, and a CalFresh card would be a huge blessing and support.
I work twice a week, which is the most that I can work with my school schedule. Last semester was very hard. I would either have class all day, or have class and get off and work, or on weekends I would work. I did not have a single day off for 4 months straight to skim by. I would have to choose between eating or school supplies. This is affecting my mental and physical health. I hope that I can make this year better, and be excited for school, not dread it...
I'm in medical school and am taking out ~$33,000 in loans every four months. I'm spending more than half of my loan money on rent and utilities. Since I'm in medical school, I have to do volunteer work to gain more knowledge and skills in order to be the best doctor I can become. I have no time outside of this to work for money, or else I'd be jeopardizing my education. Because of the high cost of living in the Bay Area, I'm struggling to pay for groceries, basic living expenses, and car insurance so that I can get to and from the clinic I'm volunteering in at Martinez. I do not buy as much food as I need because of the expenses of living and the books/technology/transportation costs required for me to learn medicine.
I have been unemployed this last month. I am in the process of getting hired at an on campus job in university housing, though I have multiple applications out for more job opportunities. Although some of my schooling is covered through CalVet college fee waiver program, I am struggling to cover extra school fees and books. I am trying to further my future by earning a degree to one day be financially stable and available to help others in need.
This is my 2nd year at CSU Chico and during my first year I had no problems with money as my financial aid covered most of it, the rest was barely paid for by my parents. I found out last year after multiple visits to the financial aid office that for the rest of my education that I will not be getting almost any financial aid. It was for the reason that my parents just barely made the line of which to receive financial aid and so I ended up getting $750 (in grants) this year instead of the $12,000 (in grants) from last year. My dad works as a construction worker and it's only on certain weeks that he gets paid good which ends up making it like we have money but in reality, the pay is inconsistent. Anyways seeing this my parents and friends have told me to drop out but I really did not want to give up on college. I am looking for a job to help cover my expenses.
I lost my job because my car broke down and I could no longer get to it, as it was too far away. The place I had been living burned completely down last year in the Ponderosa fire, I lost everything I owned.
I am a full time college student with a 3.8 GPA. I currently have a job and have requested more hours because I'm struggling to pay rent. I have been getting sick due to living off cheap meals like ramen. I am not one to ask for things, but I am definitely in need.
New mother, baby is 7 weeks old. WIC food vouchers are mainly dairy foods and mother had to stop eating dairy while breast feeding due to milk intolerance in baby.
I am enrolled in online college classes. I just lost my job and am trying to look for another one right now. I only have $200 left in my account. That will only get me so much food and everything adds up. Getting CalFresh would be a huge help since I am on my own. My parents don't have money to help me.
After taxes, insurance, union dues, and retirement contributions, I only take home $1020 every two weeks. My rent is $1,200. I have worked all my life, never been unemployed, and never requested assistance before. I have been with Sheriff's Department and Probation for almost 25 years, and I still make the same amount I did when I started all those years ago. The price of everything continues to go up but my pay continues to go down. We struggle every month just to make it. I hate to ask for assistance, but I don't know what else to do.
I know I qualify for CalFresh and Medi-Cal, but with the fire I am running late collecting all the documents. I also am having a hard time reaching my county due to the emergency with fire. Need help with food asap. Thankfully, I've already gotten temporary Medi-Cal...
I need help with many basic day to day activities of daily living, because I'm disabled and have great difficulty getting things done. I'm currently suffering of rheumatoid arthritis, fibromyalgia, and seizures. I'm also suffering of a severely injured back and possible some other disease that is causing me great abnormal weightless and extreme fatigue. I'm currently working with my PCP to figure out what is causing it.
I am on various medications for endometriosis, bipolar disorder, etc. The cost of my copays for medications has skyrocketed. It is really important to stay on my medications. But that has made it hard to buy food that I’m supposed to be eating. Trying to make $30 last a week for groceries makes it really hard to buy vegetables and fruit. I have gone down two sizes in a month because I have been balancing the cost of my medications against my purchases of groceries.
I just moved out of my single-mother's house. I still help her with bills and also try to pay my own rent and utilities with the little money I could provide. I can only afford to work part-time because I am also in school and in the ROTC program. I would be very grateful to have some help with being able to buy nutritious food instead of settling for quick, unhealthy food such as ramen and hot dogs.
I'm 18. I work 30 hours a week and I spend all my money on rent and on BART going to and from work.
I am a full time student with 2 part time jobs. I have been living off a small budget and student loans, but currently have a past due tuition balance and will not be able to afford groceries or rent after the month of October.
I'm unable to work because of medical reasons and I'm working on filing for medical disability.
I am earning my medical coding and billing certificate in order to work in a profession that I should be able to handle with my medical condition. My spouse is also working towards a new career in appliance repair and handyman services. We were both were living in Fairfield in October of 2017 when the fire hit and we were evacuated.
I'm hungry and am trying my best to hang in there. It's hard to work with no gas in my car, no food in my belly.
I was recently let go from my job, I have bipolar disorder and it was affecting my performance. I see a doctor now and I’m trying to get the right medication and treatment. I have applied for SDI but haven't received anything yet.
I was a full time student last semester, will be a part time student this upcoming (summer semester) and if I still don't have a job in the fall will resume being a full time student. I am currently in the application process for summer internships. I'm staying in my ex-husbands house for a while, I am in the same house as my kids, but I don't have the funds to pitch in (and they are over 18). My daughter pays for my cell phone. The only bill I have is for my stuff in storage. I am saving up money for my car which needs 980.00 in engine work and new brakes.
We just moved from San Diego to El Dorado County because our family is here and it's cheaper. We have both been applying to the hospitals around the area as well as construction myself. I have been on multiple interviews and unfortunately they picked other people for the positions. We are looking for some help with food during this rough patch until I am able to find a full time position to bring in money. Between our rent and bills we have very little left for food afterwards. We pray that a job will come up soon. My wife works for two companies on contracts and her income varies monthly.
My boyfriend and I have been homeless for months. In January we were in a car accident that totaled $48,000. Following that I got extremely sick and wasn’t able to work so I was forced to quit. I was kicked out of my house at 17 in February and moved into my boyfriend's house after spending a week in a shelter. He has a fulltime job which barely makes ends meet. We often go to bed so hungry it's hard to sleep.
I started a long term substitute teacher position, but do not get paid until September 10th. I anticipate this amount to be $1,500 for the amount of time I worked in August. The hours for my sub job are irregular. I was not able to work June & July because school was closed. I am looking for a fulltime teaching job.
I'm 18, just started college, and living away from home for the first time. I only need help for a little while as I'm getting on my feet.
I became ill in Dec 2017 and am currently on unpaid company leave. I now only have Social Security retirement benefits. I live with my boyfriend and his mother. They are both disabled and his home care worker shops and provides their food from their disability and retirement income. I purchase my own food due to a special diet. I am having surgery next week and will be home several weeks to recover.
I was a registered nurse until I fractured my right heel bone and was forced to retire. Disability was declined. The only income I have is Social Security ($1,047 per month). Each month, my expenses average $75 for major medical insurance, $80 for one prescription medication, $54 for auto insurance, $30 for auto registration, $250 for propane for cooking and heating (I live in a camper). I do not have dental insurance and can't afford to get care for my bad teeth. I really need help for food and other basic necessities.
I'm 25 and I take care of my grandma who has been on dialysis for 11 years. I’ve helped her every day for several years for free. It has become increasingly hard to support myself with very little money and hardly any family support. I go to local churches and food drives to get food for my grandparents and myself. Unfortunately, I find that many days and nights I go hungry. I am extremely independent; seeking help for others is easy. For myself, I have trouble accepting anything I don't feel I earned, but everyone needs a little help to get on their feet sometimes. I don't intend to take advantage of CalFresh services for an extended period. Only until I find a job that can allow me flexible hours while my grandma needs my continued support.
Just lost my job, already lined up a new job but it won't start for four months.
I will not be able to walk for five months due to a car accident. Need food badly.
I currently live with 3 other women from craigslist in a house. I am a student at Fresno State I did not receive financial aid this year. I have not had money for grocery shopping since last year. I have been living on fast food. I do get paid 12 dollars an hour but since I am going to school part-time am not able to work enough hours to get by.
All of my credit cards are maxed out and I do not know how I am going to buy food, pay my utilities or put gas in my car, let alone pay the rest of my bills this month. I am job hunting, but I have a child with autism and he only goes to an educational program for three hours a day.
I am living out of vehicles and sleeping on people’s couches. I have a severely debilitating handicap from my legs being snapped and twisted making it extremely difficult to stand or walk places. There is not enough income coming to pay rent let alone buy food. Looking for some stability.
I was a full time federal government employee until over a month ago. I am disabled with anxiety and bi-polar. I'm applying for disability. I expect us to have trouble with food expenses for the next few months.
I am currently employed, but will be out of work by the end of the week (9/14). I will be looking for new work, and will just need CalFresh to help with groceries until I am making enough to reasonably afford them again.
We were displaced from Paradise by the Camp Fire. We lost everything except for our vehicles and our pets. We lost our rental and all its contents, plus our workplaces burned down. We’re temporarily staying with family. We will be looking for work and a place to live we just need some help for a little bit to get back on our feet.
I’m separated, going through divorce, not yet finalized. The ex-husband lost his job and I am looking for part-time work. I have two sons, both with ADHD, one with autism, and I spend a good amount of time parenting. Currently I just want to be able to feed them without building up debt on a credit card or depleting my savings account. My situation is embarrassing and humbling, but serious. If approved, I hope this will only be a temporary solution until I get on my feet, start a business, and rebuild my life.
My husband walked out on me and my two kids a couple months ago and filed for divorce a month ago. He is still paying the mortgage and utilities but barely any for food and has otherwise cut me off financially. I started college two years ago to become a nurse and am still in school. I have used up what little money I had to enroll in school and get my kids started back to school. I am trying to sort out my situation and have some family help but have urgent need for food assistance and expect that to be the case for some time as my husband says he's not helping any further and I have a few years before I will be able to become a nurse, and school prohibits me from working full time. I am not eligible for unemployment as I have been home raising kids all these years.
I spend the majority of my money on food in Marin. This is because my hourly wage is so low in comparison to the cost of living. On top of it all, I am a wilderness first responder, and I work with youth outdoors as an environmental science educator. My job is to inspire hope, action, connection, and responsibility within our youth - however, my value is not reflected in pay, unfortunately - as teachers across America well know!
My unemployment ran out in April. I am under a one-year lease. My son works where I used to work, and he has the only income for the family. The rent is all of our income. My other children are in college full time and there is no work-study this year. They are on grants for their academics through PELL and SEOG. I really want someone who can evaluate our situation and provide resources. Thank you.
Not sure if this helps at all. The last time I had to renew my CalFresh all I needed to do was to update and give some paperwork and I kept forgetting, just like I forget a lot of things and stress about them. I struggle from paycheck to paycheck and at times I do ask my parents for money or food especially because my daughter is growing and eating more. We do live in a low income housing and we qualify for the HEAP program for our PGE. I do go to the food bank when I can which is a big help but we still need help with other foods.
I was working full time at a large hotel in Monterey. I had good pay, but was offered a job at a local business for higher pay and Monday to Friday (since hotels are open 24/7, a Monday to Friday schedule seemed like a luxury). The hiring job asked me to put in my two weeks’ notice for my past job. I was already training for my new job when they called me and said the position wouldn't work out since they didn't have it in the budget. Now I'm unemployed and applying for jobs.
Our income is around $3,000 per month, but it gets expensive with credit card bills, auto insurance, gas, clothes, diapers, utility bills, repairing the old car, etc. At times we cannot keep up with affording food. So we spend $8 for four people on McDonalds or boiling potatoes with salt is what we have to do to survive.
I have a car payment that's $336 every month and a weekly daycare bill of $175. After rent, the phone bill, and gas, I have nearly nothing to spend on food. I often don't eat so that my child can eat. I feel terrible feeding him cheap unhealthy food, especially because I enjoy cooking, but I can't afford the ingredients to cook anything. It's embarrassing, but I often eat leftover food at work or the school cafeteria so I have the energy to function. I would absolutely appreciate any help I can get.
When I applied for Meals on Wheels, they told me I qualified for CalFresh. I cannot work due to my health and age. The cost of living is high here and I have been struggling. I do not want to burden my family.
I escaped a domestic violence situation. I'm safe now but I need assistance. It's getting desperate.
Sheltered, with longtime friends. Unable to pay any rent, but help with their utilities when able. I pay for my cell phone only. I have not found fulltime work, despite a 4 year college business degree and 35 years of experience, since 2008. All resources meant for retirement have had to be used, and are depleted. Until last summer, I had paid all my bills on time for 35 years. Bankruptcy is scheduled next month. The car goes to repo tomorrow. I have HIV and am disabled depending on which social service or doctor you talk to, and am unable to get SSI. I am unable to get a job interview for full-time anything, all in my 50's. Well, it was damn good until 2008. Thank you for letting me vent a little. So glad I didn't have a mortgage, or children. I would have been a great dad.
I am the only one who takes care of my groceries, medical bills, CT scan tests. I had to leave my job of 9 years as I became very ill with lung cancer, despite never having smoked. I now only have 1/2 of my right lung. I cannot work as I still struggle with this health issue. I have no income, used all my disability, and have exhausted my unemployment insurance. I am still disabled it has only been since August end of the month that I was released. I cannot pay my rent, copays for oncologist. After 3 hours of light activity I get very exhausted and my body aches. I have back lumbar pain and still recovering from two surgeries to remove the cancer. I am sure if I had money I could get food and that will boost my energy a little. I need help please. Right away - I am hungry and need food.
I'm technically homeless, but make just enough money to pay for a bunk bed in a hostel for a few days at a time. My wallet was stolen and a replacement EBT card was sent to my mailbox in Pasadena, but I do not have the transportation to be able to retrieve it. My situation has drastically changed since I previously applied and I would like to be considered for an increase. I work during the day between 12:30pm and 4:30pm.
It still feels strange to have to skip 1-2 meals a day. I don't like to think of myself as the type of person that complains about their situation either. I will always do anything in my power to overcome adverse situations. By applying for CalFresh, I don't see myself as complacent, but attempting to take control of my situation and the cards life has dealt me.
I may be having to move in the next 1 to 4 weeks, depending on the grace of my landlord, otherwise I will be homeless. I have no family support at this time and no friends willing or able to help me. I have pop tarts and tomato soup and frozen burritos until I can get help from CalFresh. I have multiple physical and mental health challenges and doctor appointments each week.
We just recently moved to California and are struggling each month with enough money to properly buy groceries after rent, insurance, gas, utilities, and vehicle bills. I am pregnant which will make four in this household, and I am nervous we won't be able to buy enough food. We cannot afford childcare so I have to stay home with my children. I'm hoping we can get any kind of help there is available, even a little goes a LONG way.
I used to average 30-35 hrs. a week, but the last two months it's been fewer hours... last paycheck I grossed $275 for 22 hrs. I just need help for 6 months or less while we are in the slow period until work picks back up. Just worried about the coming months.
I was a caregiver for and lived with my dad who passed in 2016. I am disabled but am waiting to talk to a surgeon before I apply for SSI. I feel like I messed up the rest of my life so that my parents didn't have to go in nursing homes. I am so hungry.
I lost my job when the restaurant where I worked for 13 years was sold. My second job is less than 2 hours a day serving lunch at a school district and I don’t get paid during the summer break. My husband's second job is very variable. After deducting the medical, vision, and dental insurance for the five of us, and taxes, there's very little left my husband's paycheck.
I've had 3 back injuries this year. I work as a caregiver to the elderly in their homes. I go without pay when I take time off work or decline offered jobs from my agency due to my back injuries. I can only afford to eat once or twice a day and my health is declining. I buy most of my own food. I try my best not to eat the healthy foods that my parents buy or cook because my father is diabetic and my mother is pre-diabetic and they need healthy food for themselves.
I never thought I would ever apply for this help, but things started to quickly go downhill when I got a DUI two years ago. I had a great job working as a tank driver delivering fuel to gasoline stations. I paid big time for my bad decision. I lost everything. I lost my job and then my girlfriend left with our kids because I didn't have any income. I fell into a big depression... I just need a little help for a couple months as I'm already working on getting my Class A license again.
I am a sophomore in college paying for my own rent, tuition, food, books, and all other expenses. I receive no financial assistance from either of my parents because they are not capable of doing so while also maintaining financially stability themselves. I have to budget my spending on food especially. I have often skipped meals in fear that if I spend too much money on food I may not have enough funds to pay for rent.
I am currently in difficult financial bind- never been in a position such as now. Even help for one month would help my son and I immensely. I just started working my regular, consistent hours at the school. I was off during the summer and working our summer daycare for just about 3 hours a day except field trip days (1-2 times per week). I barely got by. I am almost embarrassed to be here, but hey, it happens, and I know I am not alone. First and foremost, my son needs to know that food will always be available.
I just finished a master’s degree program for counseling, and I am in between jobs. I took a position with a counseling agency (non-profit), but I do not have an income yet. I am going on two weeks of no income, and I am really worried. I worked my entire life and have never been on assistance programs and I know this would be a temporary thing, but I need help especially as a single mom.
I'm homeless and I make 525 per month working 16 hours a week. Fortunately, I get to work when others call in sick.
I am looking for a new job and place to live with my kid. We had to move out of our house because my father-in-law got cancer. They can’t have a 5-year-old who gets sick all the time living in the house, and I don't know what we’re going to do.
I was living at a house owned by a church in Paradise. I haven’t had income in years, but had minimal financial assistance from family members. Now that the church is gone, I really have nothing. The house and all of my belongings are gone. The church didn’t have fire insurance either. I'm just trying to do whatever I can to stay afloat.
I am helping my adult son apply. He has a disability; he was diagnosed with mild intellectual disability when he was about 8. He had benefits, but when he became 18, they said he doesn’t qualify anymore. I disagree. I've been wanting to reapply for him but haven’t had the chance. Since we have moved to Sacramento, I haven't been able to work a steady job because of my disease. I can't afford to support my adult son because I also have two younger children that I support on my own. My son is crashing with family or friends, but doesn’t have a stable place to live. I try to take him food to eat when I can. I don’t know what else to do.
I have been working as an appraiser for 16 years, but since moving to Sacramento, I haven't been able to find work. A couple weeks ago, my annual software fees were due as well as my business insurance, and I was unable to pay. This has shut down my business. I am looking for work. I am selling things in order to survive on a daily basis. I anticipate this request for food stamps to be temporary. I look forward to getting back on my feet soon but some assistance, especially food assistance, would help immensely.
I really don't want to do this, but I need help. I just have to get through this to graduate.
Financially not making it. My landlord is about to begin eviction proceedings on me as my rent has been late every month. I struggle to get enough food for my home. I feed my kids before I feed myself. I recently ended up in the hospital from dehydration and malnourishment.
I am legally deaf due to a recent illness. A friend loaned me a hearing aid. I can only use phone on speaker. I am terrified of not getting medical treatment or having a place to live because of my income and disability status. I have been disabled for 30 years. A recent illness caused my condition to worsen. I need help.
I pay for wifi also and I take care of my emotional support dog Charlotte who is about 35 lbs. So any extra funds I have left goes to feeding and keeping her groomed. I can't walk to food pantries and such as they are too far. I get help from friends or neighbors with a hot meal here and there. I am starving almost after the first week after payday and I am becoming more unhealthy. I do not know what else to do. I am hungry now as I am typing this.
As I mentioned before, my father abandoned my family and I about 3 some-odd years ago. Not only was he a major financial help to the family, but he was a great emotional support as well. Since then, we have tried our best to cope with the losses, both emotionally and financially. My sister and I work retail jobs and are the main sources of income, but even our pooled finances do NOT cover bills, rent, and food. (My mother is disabled and cannot work.) Even with SSI, most of the money goes towards rent and bills. Often, we have to go without food for several days at a time or ask to borrow, lots of times without success. I know that you get a lot of sob stories on these types of platforms, but for whomever is reading, I ask that you go over my case and help my family and I as best as you can. It has not been easy, but we are doing our part.
Originally I couch surfed and at one point lived in my car. I am a high school student working full time just to get by. I make about $900 a month, but $500 goes to rent, $120 goes to phone bills and the other is gas and groceries. Most the time I under pay the rent by up to $200. I was lucky enough to be taken in by my girlfriend and her parents but they expect me to still contribute to household.
I won't receive income until I am approved for disability insurance so I have an account balance of zero dollars. My significant other (whom I live with and share the bills) suffered from a compound fracture in her ankle two days ago. She had to have surgery to reinforce her bones with metal plates and screws. She will be discharged today. The doctor is not allowing her to work for four to six weeks and she only has $600 in her bank account.
I am currently a graduate student and will soon be moving to San Diego. Since I am moving I was forced to quit my job. Unfortunately, my mother lost her job a few years back and is unable to support me financially. My father, who now lives in Texas, is also unable to support me. The financial aid I have received from school only covers money for tuition, books, rent, and utilities. I currently don't have the income to purchase food, toiletries, and other necessary items. Receiving an EBT card would lift a large weight off my shoulders, I could focus more on my education rather than how I'm going to make ends meet each month.
I am on workers comp. The last 2 months have been hard food wise. My husband's mom sends cash from Russia to help with our rent and my brothers are loaning me money to cover my bills until I get my settlement and can pay them back but it leaves us with only about $150 for food every month for 2 people.
We relocated to be closer to family because of our health problems, but we have been unable to secure any permanent housing yet. We’re going broke paying for nightly budget motels which double their rates every weekend. We will most likely be living in our car starting tomorrow until my wife's next social security check comes in next week. We’ll go back to a motel until we can secure housing. I am disabled with COPD and require medical oxygen and a sleep apnea machine, my wife has renal failure and is confined to a wheelchair.
My school referred me to CalFresh. I am a senior in college and live on my own. As rewarding as that feels, at the end of the day, I do struggle a lot with paying bills and still having money left over to buy food. No one else supports me, so with the little money I have left over I am normally only able to afford unhealthy meals. If I were to have the opportunity to receive some type of financial assistance, I feel that I would be able to be a heathier person and feel better throughout the day while studying.
I spend about $200 on groceries and another $200 on car insurance. My commute to work is 40 miles every day, and it takes about $50 to fill my tank every week ($100 every pay period). I work & I work hard, but I can't do this on my own. I'm tired of just surviving, I'm ready to start thriving. I'm making progress to where I want to be in life, but right now I need some help. Sometimes my roommates eat my food while I'm away at work, so what was supposed to last me a couple of days only lasted a night. I can't afford to keep buying groceries, so I'm just about living off of multi-vitamins & protein shakes. Even if you can't help me, thank you for taking the time to look at my case, & I hope you're having a great day when you read this.
As my children are getting older, they are consuming more. Their father, who lives in Colorado, will not increase his monthly child support payments to help cover costs as our children get older. I am a self-employed single mother and in addition have now have taken on the caregiver role for my elderly folks, one with dementia and the other who recently had a brain injury. I am not able to make ends meet. Receiving CalFresh benefits would greatly help my situation.
Currently, I am looking for a job near my apartment but even with that money I would earn, I still have to pay rent, utilities, and still go to college next month.
I have extensive health problems. Due to serious food sensitivities, my diet is very expensive. If I eat food that's come in contact with wheat, corn, or tapioca I will vomit for days. This rules most cheap meal options out. Additionally, I have PTSD and ADHD, which require expensive ongoing medication. My ongoing costs include $150 or so for therapy, which I can not go without, about $600 for health insurance, paying down a $900 credit card bill, and soon I may need to replace the computer that is my livelihood as far as job hunting goes. I want to save as much as I can so I can move into a rented room when I find a job. I have no family to fall back on. I legally emancipated from my mother at 16 due to abuse, and my father is dead.
I have not been able to work for the past three months. Due to medical reasons, I cannot stand for long periods of time. I am self-employed so if I don't work I don't make an income. I'm hoping to have a medical procedure so I can return to work in the next couple of months. My partner has been actively looking for work but he has been my primary caregiver, which has limited his schedule over the past couple of months.
"I attend a computer science program that offers a tuition Income Share Agreement (ISA). That means I'll give them nearly 30% of my pay once I'm employed, and living assistance ISA to pay for tuition and living costs, so I applied for both this year.
 Finding part-time work would be difficult - classes are from 9:30AM to 5:20PM on weekdays and our weekends are for working on projects and building our portfolios."
I am a full-time PhD student at UCSF. The past few months, after a string of unexpected expenses have caused my credit debt to build, I have found it hard to make ends meet and I haven't been able to save any money to pay my taxes. This has left me very vulnerable and has caused a great deal of stress. Beyond this, I am not allowed to seek outside employment while I am enrolled at UCSF, and I am expected to spend 40-60 hours a week conducting research in a lab.
I'm just a student trying to survive in San Francisco. I want to have one less stress which includes food. I don't want to feel depressed that sometimes I barely have anything to eat or can't afford food on campus.
I send my mother $175 every month. She uses it for food, bills, and other basic necessities for herself and my younger sister. This takes away the money that I could use for my own groceries.
Not working, currently looking for a job, not in school, zero savings left, zero income, credit cards maxed out, can't pay rent, bills, or student loans.
I lost my job few months ago and I did some side gigs through a phone app but the app shut down. I'm hungry. I only have 2 dollars left and I've already borrowed from everyone I could ask.
I have no money for food. I'm a student in a program that will help me get a job in the tech industry. I have not eaten since Friday.
I newly transferred to SFSU, and I would like to be able to cook for myself, but affording food isn't easy. I am also in the process of looking for a part-time job.
I am a low-income student and the most expensive thing besides transportation is affording food so I hope I will be relieved of these financial barriers. I have skipped meals waiting for my financial aid to arrive as well as trying to budget my food expenses.
I'm a recent graduate and I'm currently unemployed, but actively applying for jobs. Once I secure employment, I will pay a small amount for rent to my parents as well as make sure I pay my fines ($2200) to the Sonoma County Court. Obtaining food stamps will greatly alleviate my financial burden.
I'm in a challenging situation right now so I was hoping to get assistance for a few months until I get a job.
I suffer from a movement disorder akin to Parkinson's, and it's thought to be myoclonus, or myoclonus dystonia. I can't work as of now, and I am going through further tests to get a precise diagnosis, but it's a lengthy process thus far. I am paying rent with my state disability, as social security has rejected my application for disability. This leaves me with about $20 for the month. This means gas for school and food for myself. I cannot make $20 stretch that far, as much as I would like to. I'm currently appealing the denial, but this process takes time, and I don't have resources to survive, much less the physical capability a lot of the time.
I've recently acquired a job but I can't get more hours and I'm barely making enough to cover insurance and housing, and forget even trying to go to college. I have $35 to my name for gas and food for a week.
I am 64 yrs. old. I receive SSI SSA. I am also on section 8 housing. I am having a great deal of problems making ends meet.
We are currently insured with assistance from Covered California through our old worker. We have a very tight budget and often cannot afford to eat after paying bills. Please assist us asap.
I am a full-time, first-generation college student who just moved to San Luis Obispo to pursue an education at Cal Poly SLO. I have just enough money to pay for my rent this month with the money I have in my savings account. Even though I get some government aid to pay for my classes that doesn't include my books and other resources I need for school. I just found a job here and all the money I earn will go towards paying my rent.
My husband, newborn baby, and I live with my husband's parents. We do not receive help such as extra money or taken to get groceries and we do pay his parents for rent and utilities. My husband pays for his own car, insurance, and our phone bills, so it doesn't leave us with very much extra money for groceries when only one person is able to work.
I receive monthly cancer treatment at Lucile Packard. I hope I qualify because when I get my treatment I need to buy food for myself to keep my weight up.
I am changing jobs and looking for an apartment in Roseville. I don't think I'll have enough money to eat soon.
I had an injury, lost my job, and then lost my car. I am living on the streets and my bank account is closed. I am trying to stay at a friend's, but sometimes I have nowhere to go. I tried to get into a shelter but I have not gotten in yet. I go to the public library to search for jobs.
I am 18 years old. I got kicked out of my father’s household at 16 after many years of abuse throughout my life. My boyfriend and I work full time but struggle to make ends meet at times due to bills and overall the cost of living. We live downstairs in a friend's house. If I could receive help with monthly groceries that would be a huge help. Maybe we can soon move into our own apartment and start saving up money.
I am an incoming sophomore student going into UCSB from Florida. My family's household earnings are dominated by my mother, who lives barely above the poverty line. We live in this house which is owned (mortgaged from bank) by my brother, who is in the military and has helped my mom pay for the expenses of me, herself, as well as our 70 year old grandmother. Going into UCSB as an out of state student places a heavy burden of taking out around sixty-thousand dollars worth of loans in the first year (due to non-residency, and in-dorm housing rent). I support myself as an independent paying for a personal car insurance, as well as healthcare - in order to become a resident of California.
My mom passed away about three years ago and I have $8,000 saved up from her insurance that she gave to me which is how I have been able to mange school and living expenses. All that money will be gone in a couple of months with the rent here being so high. My dad just recently got a new job about two weeks ago after being unemployed for a very long time - I was responsible for helping him out until he got back up on his feet.
I'm a low-income student who doesn't receive financial help from my family to pay for college or living costs. I work a part-time job and attend school full-time, but do not receive enough to cover food expenses in addition to living expenses and tuition. 
I'm a transfer student at UC Santa Barbara. My family is unable to help pay for my college. I have been saving up money for three years in order to pay for most of the college expenses. Because of the time my dad spent in the hospital combined with the expenses of buying medication, I'm in a precarious position in affording the necessities of student life, like food every week. My Dad is dealing with depression along with a plethora of other health issues, which have affected his work. My Mom has also been having health issues of her own as she requires a cane due to her bad hip. I am part of the Educational Opportunity Program, which pointed me to CalFresh.
I am a first generation college student attending an expensive university in an expensive city. I am looking for additional work to pay for my own food although haven’t had much luck yet. I truly hope I can qualify no matter how small because anything and everything helps.
I am part of the EOPS program at Santa Barbara City College and am currently using my credit line for food and gas because I only have enough money to pay rent at the end of the month. I am looking for a job, but only moved here about one month ago.
I'm currently a first generations college student and my parents have a low income. I'm trying to get any help possible so that I can stay in school.
I am a full time student and work part time to pay my bills. I am taking on loans to pay for my food/utilities/book expenses.
I receive substantial financial aid, but finance all other expenses in my life. I work for no pay right now at a philanthropy which takes up most of my time so it's hard for me to work during the school year. During summer, I work 5-6 days a week at a restaurant.
I desperately need to eat healthier and be able to afford proper meals while I wait for a hearing with a disability judge. My boyfriend is sick with stress trying to help me for so long. I need security to know I can buy myself food.
I am away from my family and it is hard to buy & get healthy food while I am on a budget and I have to be paying a lot for my room and college materials.
I've been broke the last couple of months, I was getting maternity leave. I'm going back to work next month, but only part-time. I found a daycare that's perfect for my hours but it’s too expensive - a month of child care is more than my rent. With a new baby that is growing fast, I have to keep up with new clothes plus diapers. Since I'm breast feeding, I'm constantly hungry. I do have WIC.
I am working fewer hours in order to finish up school. I work more hours during the summer.
I recently broke my hand and I'm going from job to job. I'm living on the streets in Gilroy, San Martin, & Morgan Hill. I don't do drugs or drink alcohol. At age 13 I was diagnosed with pseudo hypoparathyroidism type 1b. At a young age I left the house and started living on my own, working, and feeding myself. Now I'm down and need a little help. My stomach is growling as I write this.
My unemployment ends June 30th. I have not yet found steady work. I am trying my hardest to find work and keep food on the table for my child. I am desperate to feed my family and I really need help.
I was not working as much for a while due to low demand in daycare hours. It has drained my accounts to the point where I have absolutely no money. Thankfully now I have been really busy with work and school, that I can re-apply and actually qualify. I really need the support right now in order to keep going to school and having a place to live and food to eat. This will help me get back up on my feet.
I live with my mother and I handle all her financials due to her health conditions. I don't receive any type of child support for my children.
I am a full-time student, I work 30 or more hours a week, and I'm pregnant. Any help I can receive is appreciated. Thank you!
I became unemployed in the last week. I do not have my rent of $1,000 that is due on the 1st. I lost my job because my babysitter quit on me unexpectedly. I am actively seeking a new job.
I used to have CalFresh, but started working and got off it. A couple weeks ago, I lost my job due to my pain in my leg. I'm looking for another job. I applied for SSI three years ago and was only granted partial benefits, but my pain has since gotten worse and it's hard keeping a job.
Looking for work, but not having success. I was surviving off savings, but my resources are now exhausted. I am turning to any public assistance I can get just to bridge the gap.
I'm 62, my health isn't very good, and I go to dialysis three times a week. I'm trying to get a transplant at Stanford. I really could use a helping hand.
I haven’t really eaten in 3 days and I hope I can get this today or soon. I understand there are many people worse off than me... just mentally and physically I could really use this...
I have never lived on my own before. Much of it can be overwhelming. Living paycheck-to-paycheck is like a scheduled anxiety attack. My health and weight have declined greatly since moving out because the only food I can afford for myself is fast food and Dollar Tree items. I get sick more often due to my poor health. My goal is to be able to purchase more groceries that are healthier and more nourishing.
I finally have stable housing and going back to school. It would be extremely beneficial for me to have CalFresh as an option while I'm a student so I don't have to worry so hard about where my food income is coming from.
I don't get enough nutritious food to eat. I retired at age 65 because my physical job of retail grocery cashier was taking a toll on my body and mental health. I am waiting until age 66 (my full retirement age for social security) because I will need the bit of extra money that I'll receive by waiting. I have never asked for help before and neither has anyone in my immediate family, and I have a bit of shame about applying for this food assistance, but I've been urged by a medical provider to not be so proud and to apply for some short term assistance.
I have just recently moved to Santa Cruz. I am a fourth year student and I have come here because in two weeks I have training for an on-campus job. But for now I have no source of income for groceries. I also am not receiving any financial support from my mother because she has to support my three brothers back home. And my father has recently gotten released from jail and we've had very little contact in the past seven months. This is the first time that I will live off campus and not have a meal plan.
I hate asking for help, but I'm down to my last straw here.
I just got hired at a new job. I will start working Friday, September 28th. I am expecting to work 20-25 hours a week but I do not have any paystubs to show now.
I'm a low-income student and my family cannot pay for my tuition, send money for food, supplies, etc.
I have two work study internships on campus and will be living in a college apartment without a meal plan. The expense of groceries would be one less thing I would have to worry about with CalFresh.
This year I decided to live off campus since it was really expensive on campus. My financial aid covers for my housing but there is not enough left over for me to buy groceries. I was hoping CalFresh could help me pay for my groceries and not stress about taking more hours at work to have enough money for everything.
My girlfriend and I are both college students and work to pay the bills. Neither of us gets help from family.
I just paid rent and apart from saving for next month's rent, I don't have other money. I need help buying food.
I'm a full time student - before becoming a student, I had been supporting myself entirely since I was 19. I struggle with food security and am not hoping to use this resource forever, just enough to eat 3 meals a day while trying to get an education.
After taking six weeks of paid family leave to care for my ailing husband, my employer said there was no work for me. I applied for unemployment benefits, which I received and am currently on. Once my husband passed away, we stopped receiving his disability benefits and can't pay for rent and utilities.
I have a worker’s compensation claim. I have now been switched to Permanent Disability and that amount is only $580 every 2 weeks. This has left me in a really bad place. At this time, I am waiting a hearing on my case. I am in limbo but in the meantime my family is suffering due to this hardship. I am a hard working person who has been off work since May 2017! I am in depression!
My son had a heart attack and open heart surgery. He cannot work and needs home care for a few months. I am financially unable to take care of both of us. He moved in with me about 8 months ago and did odd jobs for money. I was doing occasional caregiver jobs for extra income but now neither one of us can work and the rent increased when he moves in with me.
It's hard to find work while caring for an elderly family member as I am the only person around to help with lifting and things of that nature.
My husband started nursing school in August and can only manage 24 hours a week at work now. His main at-home care client was in the hospital this month and so we won't be getting a paycheck this week.
I recently lost my job. I applied for unemployment insurance and started the process of establishing my own business while taking interviews and submitting resumes. I'm applying for assistance for myself and my two sons while I'm having this tough time!
My spouse is completely unable to work. I can barely afford to keep the roof over our heads and there is no money left for food.
I lost my home in the Tubbs Fire. All of my money that I did receive from FEMA went to hotel costs. After couch surfing for six months, I finally found a friend who had a room opening up. Unfortunately I had spent everything on hotel costs, rental applications, and simply trying to get my life back together. I have nothing left. I need help. I'm putting myself in debt because I thought now would be a good time to see a dentist after seven years... I figure no one is going to actually read this anyway, so it's mostly just venting. Maybe I'll get lucky, and whoever's in charge of my case will at least understanding what those of us who didn't own three homes before the Tubbs Fire are struggling with.
My husband is a carpenter and his job is not steady. Last month was a good month and he grossed about $3.000.00, but not every month is not like that. Our bills are so behind. The fires really did us in - my husband was out of work for over 30 days. My oldest son has been diagnosed with autism, and has some heart problems. My boys are growing and feeding them has taken a huge toll on our finances.
"I ended up living out of my car for the last six months and have just moved into a room for rent which I found through my current employers. I am now working in a wine cellar, but the ""internship"" only lasts until November. I make 4 paychecks of $1100 which have to last me until March when I travel south for work again, which makes me enough money to move back here in time for another cellar position in August.
 
 I eat nutrigrain bars from the work pantry as my main caloric intake in the mornings. I have been cooking lentils and rice for most of my meals at home. 
 Sometimes when I'm bored, I'll do the math to figure out how I can spend $3 on food that day instead of the usual $2 budget I give myself. I'm 6'5'' and am dropping weight and starting to lose my cognitive functions. Please let me partake in this help temporarily. All I know right now is that I need to eat, then I can figure out the rest. My parents are in no position to help financially as one is on disability in Modesto worst off than me, and the other just texted me that he's been working 30 days straight in the sun doing construction. He's 60. I am 28, hoping to have enough to eat by my birthday coming up on the 8th of September.
 
 Whoever reads this, thank you."
I've lived at this address since mid 2010. The rent has increased exponentially since new ownership of the apartment complex began earlier this year. I'm destitute and cannot afford both food and medication. I am an IHSS recipient and have been bedridden since January of 2018.
I have to sell things to make my mortgage payment and to eat. I am also applying for disability.
I need help to buy food for my 10 year old sister. I had to become her Legal Guardian.
I lost my job in early September. It looks like I am going to be turned down for unemployment so I am getting desperate.
I have been on Workman’s Comp for 10 months with no end in sight. I am eating with a very low budget and not very healthy. I'm struggling, I'm not even sure if I qualify but I have to try.
My husband got sick with endocarditis last Nov and had to have open heart surgery to fix his mitro valve last month. He suffered a stroke 3 weeks ago and we have been hurting financially because of all the health setbacks.
My mother has been diagnosed with Transverse Myelitis which has left her paralyzed from 80% of her body, leaving her unable to work. My father is 69 years old and permanently disabled due to osteoporosis. I am currently a full-time student at the Cal State here and also work a part-time job. There is not enough income in my home for us to get the proper nutrition we all need. My father already receives food stamps but because I am anemic, I require a special diet and often times find myself needing to buy my food separately. My mother is also diabetic, so she too requires a special diet.
I live with my family and sometimes we don't have enough to feed us all. So I sometimes skip lunch or don't eat anything that day in order to save some money to buy things I need for my education.
I stay with my boyfriend and our situation in the place we stay is temporary. I am pregnant about 6 months. I set an appointment up so I can provide proof. I don’t have a steady income. I help some people I know do basic things that may be difficult for them and they offer money sometimes to help me out. I don’t receive a set amount yet it all goes towards living expenses.
My husband recently lost his full time job. His other job is only per diem and averages $50-100 a month. We took money out of our savings to pay for at least 4 months’ rent. We only have $100 in our savings now and that's being used for gas. I am currently 5 months pregnant. My husband and I really need help with groceries, even if it's just until my husband gets a new job.
I do not qualify for social security until I turn 66 in 2020. I just filed for unemployment and am currently searching for work, as I have a mortgage and bills to pay. I am drawing on my retirement savings to pay living expenses. The unemployment monthly payment is to be about $380, and I have not yet received payment. Jobs I am interviewing for are offering as low as $13 per hour. I have reluctantly applied for this food aid program due to the high cost of living in California.
I was in a car accident and am currently not working. I do not expect to have any income until October. I have custody of my 4 year old granddaughter and her benefits are used to pay for her school.
I work inconsistent hours. This week I worked 30 hrs., but next week I'll only work 14. I hate having to dig into my retirement savings to pay for rent.
Both I and my son John are disabled. We receive SSI disability benefits. Both kids are in college. My other son Mike is doing internship on campus and he has a job at a smoothie place to help pay his college expenses. John is unable to work or live on his own. I am usually with him 24 hours a day as he suffers from epilepsy and can have an attack at any time. My husband lost his job and is now on a job where he is paid 1099 and its sale based. The commission he receives of $2000 is temporary. He will have to go straight commission in 3 months regardless of what he has sold.
My wife and I pay a lot for health insurance because we both have autoimmune diseases. We have been putting most extra money toward doctor care and don't have much left for food now.
We just moved down from Washington and I haven’t been able to get a job as of yet. With rent having to be paid we don't much left for other necessities. Something to get my family through this time would be deeply appreciated.
Until four weeks ago I had been working as an ambulance EMT, but I was laid off. They call it a termination to avoid paying unemployment benefits, but our entire division was "fired" which consists of about six medics who were good at their jobs. We all got taken advantage of. I just need a little help while I look for another EMT job.
As a college student without much money, trying to buy enough healthy food at the grocery store is a real challenge. I'd like to make healthier food choices and focus more on my academics and less on what I'll be able to eat everyday.
I am applying for CalFresh because I am struggling to pay for food. I am currently going to college as a full time student, and I do not have full financial aid coverage. I rely on some money from my parents, but it is usually barely enough to pay for my tuition and rent. My parents’ income is less than middle class, and on top of that, they live in San Francisco, and almost everything there is quite expensive, so they are also struggling to pay for their own necessities after rent. My mom was forced to quit her job just early this year because her lease for her store got terminated. I feel very bad having to ask them for money for food. I also had some personal and family struggles resulting in this, but I am determined to finish college within four years.
I am a full time student at UC Davis and babysit 15-20 hours a week depending on my schoolwork. Having food stamps throughout the next year would allow to me to focus on school and my future.
My parents can only offer limited support as they have 6 other children. For the most part I am solely responsible for ensuring my education, and right now I'm trying to budget things and food is definitely a concern.
Unfortunately, my parents had to move to another country because they couldn't afford to live here. I have no relatives or family around. I am attending UC Davis and I was supposed to receive financial aid but they haven't completed my package. It's been really hard to pay for everything by myself since I'm a student and can't work full time.
I am a student and am looking for a job. My parents are struggling to pay for my tuition as well as my rent because they have a whole list of their own debts that they're still trying to pay off. I would like to contribute as much as possible to my rent and tuition. CalFresh would help me eat quality food without worrying about breaking the bank. Anything helps.
Recently separated from husband. My children and I are living with my parents, who helped us get a rental property so that I could get the kids into a public school. I'm trying to meet the requirements to get my license in CA for my profession and am almost done, so I can start looking for work. I move into my new place in/around the 10th-15th of Oct., where the rent will be $1995/mo. My parents are helping as much as they can and I receive unemployment until I find work, but I'm not bringing in much.
I said that I have a disability and I wanted to elaborate. I have a brain tumor that has left half of my throat and mouth paralyzed. Because of this, I must keep my immune system in top shape and I consider healthy food to be medicine. I am applying for food stamps because healthy foods are expensive and I can't afford them on my own.
I am a single mother and recently became unemployed due to my job being too far away... I stay with my parents but do pay rent... my daughter's father is not involved as much as he should be I am not sure where he is staying or whether or not he is employed...



REST ARE NEWS STORIES
Last week, UCSB students receiving benefits from CalFresh, a federal program that provides food aid to low-income students, received their February benefits early.

An email sent out on Jan. 16 on behalf of the university’s CalFresh Team stated that the early distribution was due to the government shutdown. The email also advised students to budget accordingly as CalFresh funds could be suspended indefinitely due to the ongoing disagreement over the federal budget.

But with the government’s reopening last Friday, students can expect to receive benefits again in March.

“Now that the government is no longer shut down, [CalFresh] benefit allocations should be on track for March,” wrote Melissa Fontaine, UCSB’s food security coordinator, in an email to The Bottom Line. “We anticipate some students will be affected by the government shutdown, but we are trying to be as proactive as possible to avoid hardships.”

Though CalFresh is anticipated to resume as scheduled in March, students were informed they would not be receiving any more benefits for the month of February after the early distribution. In anticipation of the possibility of future complications because of the early allocation, food security resources on campus such as the Associated Students (A.S.) Food Bank have made preparations.

“The food bank is trying to buy more food to account for the lack of CalFresh benefits right now,” said Katherine McGuire, the publicity chair for the A.S. Food Bank.

CalFresh, known federally as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), provides monthly food stipends to individuals or families in need. According to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, over 42 million people across the nation received benefits in 2017, making it the largest program in the country to combat food insecurity.

According to Fontaine, nearly 50 percent of the university’s undergraduate population (approximately 22,000 students) has experienced very low to low food security, meaning individuals are choosing less nutritious, lower quality meals or skipping meals altogether due to a lack of resources.

Students like Hilary, a junior at UCSB who asked to remain anonymous, have come to rely on their CalFresh benefits to remain food secure.

“It’s given me the opportunity to have a balanced diet,” she said. “I used to only eat once or twice a day but now I can have more.”

But CalFresh assistance is not always enough to sustain a person for the month, according to Hilary. She still utilizes other on-campus resources such as food pantries in order to meet her daily nutritional needs.

According to Danielle Kemp, the dietitian, purchasing, and systems manager for UCSB’s Housing, Dining, and Auxiliary Enterprises (HDAE), the types of food offered at the university’s food banks and pantries, such as the newly opened Miramar Food Pantry at the Sierra Madre Villages, are intended to allow students to create snacks or complete meals.

While the multiple food banks and pantries along with financial assistance are able to help cope with food insecurity on campus, Fontaine notes that they do not address the issue directly, something she wishes to do in the future.

“These programs meet today’s need but do not necessarily decrease the need of students moving forward,” she wrote. “Through education and structural solutions, we hope to reduce the number of insecure students in the future.”

For now, students are encouraged to do their research about food security resources and utilize all that is available to them.

“A lot of people don’t know that the food bank is open on Fridays so a lot of people aren’t getting access to that,” McGuire said. “Any resource that’s available should be taken advantage of.”

As the shutdown of the federal government drags on with little prospects for resolution, the Central California Food Bank has begun preparations for a worst-case scenario: the loss of food stamp funding that would send tens of thousands of recipients rushing to its door for immediate help.

CEO Andy Souza said his staff started preparations this week for possible cuts in SNAP – Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, known as CalFresh in California and more commonly referred to as food stamps.

The food bank serves more than 280,000 residents in Madera, Fresno, Kings, Tulare and Kern counties each month.

“If SNAP stops, people will come to us,” Souza said. “We have to brace ourselves and our partner agencies as to what that could look like and mean.”

According to CalFresh, about 544,000 people received SNAP benefits in this five-county area in February 2018.

Souza said a disruption in SNAP could send an influx of people to the food bank in a fashion similar to what would be seen during a natural disaster, in that possibly tens of thousands could need help in a matter of days. This differs from previous emergencies such as the Great Recession and California’s recent drought, which each saw a gradual increase in food bank service requests.

Tuesday, the Trump administration said SNAP would get funding through February, at least.

The SNAP problems came to a head in Washington this week, after House Democrats sent a letter on Tuesday to Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue demanding an explanation as to how he would keep SNAP afloat during the shutdown. Current funding was due to dry up by the end of January.


On Tuesday night, the U.S. Department of Agriculture issued a statement saying it would use a stipulation in a recently expired congressional continuing resolution to fund SNAP benefits until the end of February. Children’s nutritional programs within SNAP are funded through March.

The statement also criticized the “inability of Congress to pass an appropriations bill that safely secures our borders.”

President Donald Trump’s administration, which includes the USDA, and House Democratic leaders have been at an impasse for weeks over Trump’s demand that any appropriations bill include funding for a U.S.-Mexico border wall. The two sides illustrated the stalemate through dueling TV addresses, also held on Tuesday night.

The Food Stamp Act of 1977 provides that State agencies which administer the Food
Stamp Program, the opportunity to inform low-income households about the availability,
eligibility requirements, application procedures and benefits of the Food Stamp Program
(FSP), and receive Federal matching funds for such program informational activities.
The law prohibits reimbursement for recruitment activities.
To start up a project, a State agency will need to:
• Get FNS approval of its State plan providing specific information on the scope,
design, and financing of the projects, including sources of matching funds.
• Work with the FNS regional office to ensure full understanding of operational issues
and responsibilities.
• Draw down funds for the project only after being notified of approval by the FNS
regional office.
The following is information on allowable and nonallowable expenditures for Food
Stamp Program outreach:
Examples of allowable expenditures:
States must follow the cost principles in OMB Circular A-87. Nonprofit organizations
must follow the cost principles in OMB Circular A-122. Examples of allowable
expenditures as they pertain to Food Stamp Program outreach include:
• Placing food stamp literature in soup kitchens, shelters, churches, and other places;
• Staffing booths at fairs to provide information about the FSP or to answer questions;
• Visiting senior centers to explain FSP rules;
• Visiting homes in impoverished neighborhoods;
• Distributing information at places where low-income persons are known to gather,
such as housing developments, WIC clinics, schools in low income areas, English as
a second language classes; soup kitchens; community service providers; employers
of low wage workers, etc.
• Pre-screening individuals;
• Helping individuals fill out application forms and obtain verification;
• Accompanying applicants to the food stamp office to assist with application process;
• Conducting workshops for members of community organizations serving low income
people; 
• Reimbursing the mileage for training;
• Placing paid ads in the local newspaper to educate about the FSP and its
requirements;
• Producing and distributing educational posters and brochures;
• Producing radio and television spots to be used as public service announcements to
educate potential applicants about the FSP;
• Placing media spots on television, radio and print media;
• Designing an outreach program, including the development, publication and
distribution of materials to the community;
• Monitoring local agencies’ or contractors’ outreach performance.
Examples of unallowable costs to the Food Stamp Program:
• Acting as an authorized representative for applying, receiving food stamps at
issuance, or food purchasing;
• Intervening with local food stamp offices, at the certification interview or other times,
to advocate on behalf of specific applicants or recipients;
• Recruiting of individuals to participate in the FSP. Recruitment activities are those
activities designed to persuade an individual who has made an informed choice not to
apply for food stamps to change his or her decision and apply.
• The State agency cannot incur costs for the volunteers’ actual work since volunteers,
by definition, are unpaid. The State agency can plan, manage, facilitate, and oversee
volunteers’ work and may claim the State’s costs. The State agency may reimburse
volunteers for their actual expenses necessary to conduct FSP informational activities.
The following outlines specific actions a State must take to develop an outreach
plan:
• The State agency must file a budget projection (funding request using the FNS-366A,
Budget Projection) and optional State Plan with the FNS Regional office by August
15th for the upcoming Federal fiscal year which begins October 1. Upon the regional
office’s approval of the State Plan and budget projection, funds are made available.
• States may submit State plan amendments to FNS for approval any time during the
year to reflect changes in scope and design of their outreach efforts, including funding
changes.
• Funds are put in the State agency’s Letter of Credit.
• Thirty days following each quarter, the State agency reports its actual costs to the
FNS on an SF-269 form, Financial Status Report. This is the claim form for the
reporting of the expenditure of program costs for Federal reimbursement. The State
agency reports total expenditures, the State share of the costs, and the Federal share. 
The following enumerates fiscal policies pertaining to Food Stamp Program
outreach expenditures:
• FNS pays the State agency 50 percent of the State agency’s total allowable outreach
expenditures for FSP outreach activities. For example, if the State agency has $100
in costs, it would draw $50 in State funds and $50 in Federal funds to cover the
State’s check or funds transfer.
• The State agency’s costs would include expenditure of funds for work it has
performed in-house (by State agency employees) and payments to others for work or
services performed (e.g., private non-profit organization, for-profit contractor) under
a contract or agreement with the State agency.
• FNS pays the State agency, and the State agency in turn pays any contractors it has
procured to conduct local outreach activities.
• The State portion of the match must be State cash, with exceptions noted below.
• Allowable match sources the State may use to meet its share of match:
State Cash. The FSP regulations (7 CFR 277.4(c)) provide that the State agency may
use cash contributed or donated by other non-Federal public (State and local
government) agencies and (State and local government) institutions.
• Allowable match sources with waiver:
 --Private third party cash donations. States may request that FNS waive 7 CFR
 277.4(c) to allow private cash donations to the State agency to be used for
 program costs that would be eligible for Federal reimbursement. Waiver
 requests offering justification should come in with the Outreach Plan. FNS’s
 approval of the waiver includes conditions:
1) The funds must be under the State agency’s control. While the funds may be
donated for FSP outreach activity, the donated funds may not revert back to the
donor.
2) The donations are to be donated without any limitation or restriction imposed by
the donor.
3) The donations must not result in endorsement of a particular brand or firm over
another, or an advertising tie-in.
4) State law and State accounting procedures must allow for internal accounting
procedures to identify and access the donated funds
• Non-allowable match sources.
--Private third party cash donations without a waiver and documentation of
agreement to the conditions noted above are not permissible.
 
 --Private third party in-kind, noncash contributions. FNS is prohibited by program
regulations from reimbursing a State agency for the value of private, third-party, inkind (non-cash) donations because they do not constitute an actual expenditure of
funds by the State. Examples of in-kind donations are: office space,equipment, and
volunteer time.
--Other Federal Funds. Funds paid under another Federal assistance agreement
are not allowable unless authorized by the Federal legislation. Indian tribal
organizations have Federal funds that are generally matchable. The Outreach
Plan must specify whether Federal funds from another Federal Program
will be used and from what law (give the citation).
In the Outreach Plan the State agency will need to:
• Discuss how the project and activities are funded and identify projected project
 costs for the fiscal year. Notate the source of the funds:
 --State funds
 --Private donations with waiver justification
 --Federal funds with citation of law permitting such use.
• Identify the number of full-time equivalents (FTEs or staff years) and position of
staff that will be doing outreach. A staff year or FTE is based on 2080 hours per year.
Include only paid workers. Indicate if State agency will also be using volunteers for
outreach but do not claim a dollar value for the work performed by volunteers.
• Attach or summarize the content of any contract or agreement that identifies how
costs are to be paid.
• Summarize the State, Federal, and total cost for each project, identifying costs for
major items such as salaries and benefits, contracts, space and utilities, copying or
printing costs, supplies, equipment (such as personal computer, printer, and copier)
and repair costs, travel costs, training, and administration, etc.
• Include with the State Plan the budget projection (Form FNS-366A, Budget
Projection) and any waiver requests to be submitted to FNS (e.g., a waiver request to
use private donations).
Attachments:
Attachment A USDA’s Food and Nutrition Service Regional Offices/ FNS Web Site
Attachment B USDA’s Food and Nutrition Service Toll Free Information Line 
Attachment A
USDA’s Food and Nutrition Service Regional Offices and Web
State inquiries about State plans may be made of Food and Nutrition Service regional
offices. For further information, contact:

• Mid-Atlantic Regional Office, Mercer Corporate Park, 300 Corporate Blvd.,
Robbinsville, NJ 08691-1598
• Midwest Regional Office, 77 West Jackson Blvd, 20th Floor, Chicago, IL 60604-
3507.
• Mountain Plains Regional Office, 1244 Speer Blvd., Suite 903, Denver, CO 80204-
3581.
• Northeast Regional Office, 10 Causeway Street, Room 501, Boston, MA 02222-1069.
• Southeast Regional Office, 61 Forsyth Street SW, Room 8T36, Atlanta, GA 30303-
3415.
• Southwest Regional Office, 1100 Commerce Street, Room 5-C-30, Dallas, TX
75242-9980
• Western Regional Office, 550 Kearny Street, Room 400, San Francisco, CA 94108-
2518
USDA’s FNS Web Site
Fire up your browser and point it to our web site address:
http://www.fns.usda.gov
You will find a multitude of free outreach materials available. You may order these in
bulk from our online order form. You also may download them for local copying.
Also, if you wish to professionally print these materials, and adjust them to reflect your
State specific contact information, you may request a CD Rom of the materials starting in
November 2002. 
Attachment B
USDA’s Food and Nutrition Service Free Information Line
To provide customer service and enable FSP customers to obtain informational materials,
the Food and Nutrition Service, USDA provides a national toll free 800 number: 1-800-
2215689. This service is available 24 hours a day, 7days a week.
Who can call the toll free number? Any one can call the toll free number. Customers
include potential applicants, community leaders, faith-based groups, students, teachers,
other Federal agencies, Congressional staff, etc. Individuals interested in learning more
about the eligibility requirements and the nutritional benefits of the FSP are invited to call
for informational materials.
If I call the 800 number, what can I expect? You will have the opportunity to:
• request an informational brochure from a “live” telephone operator;
• obtain your State’s toll free number;
• have, if service is available in your State, your call automatically transferred to a
 State number. Again, this feature is not available in all States; or,
• obtain the web site address of the Food and Nutrition Service.
Callers wishing to receive food stamp informational materials will be asked by the
operator for their names, mailing addresses, and for information on how they learned
about the toll free number.
How long does it take to get the informational materials? Customers calling the toll
free number usually receive the information within 2 to 3 days. Trained personnel mail
out the informational materials from Monday through Friday, excluding Federal holidays. 
As the largest of the 15 food and nutrition assistance programs administered by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA), the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is a
central component of our nation’s nutrition assistance safety net. SNAP provides nutrition
assistance benefits and nutrition education services to low-income individuals and families in an
effort to reduce hunger and improve the health and well-being of low-income people nationwide.
While evaluation research has assessed whether the program is achieving these objectives, less is
known about the challenges low-income families face and their coping strategies to remain food
secure, defined as having adequate access to food for an active, healthy life.
This report presents findings from the qualitative In-Depth Interview component of the SNAP
Food Security (SNAPFS) study. The main SNAPFS study was conducted for the Food and
Nutrition Service of the USDA from October 2011 through September 2012, and examined the
effects of the program on food security for 6,436 SNAP households just entering the program and
3,275 households on SNAP for approximately six to seven months. The in-depth interview effort
discussed in this report was conducted between February 2012 and June 2012 and consisted of
detailed qualitative discussions held with a small subset of 90 SNAP households with children in six
states about their financial situations, their use of SNAP, and their overall food security. Interviews
were held in the homes of the respondents, unless they preferred to meet in a public location like a
library or coffee shop. Interview questions focused on expenditures and income, SNAP and food
shopping habits, eating habits, nutrition, triggers of food hardship, and food-related coping
strategies. The purpose of this formative, qualitative study was to provide important insights into the
challenges low-income families face and their coping strategies to purchase all of the food that they
need in the face of a shortfall in resources, and to inform the direction of future research on food
security, including hypothesis generation and instrument design.
This analysis was descriptive; however, for each theme, we systematically assessed whether
there were especially large differences in general financial circumstances, food hardships and coping
strategies, eating and food dynamics, and in the role SNAP plays in meeting a family’s nutritional
needs by food security level and by race/ethnicity. We observed several of the former but almost no
meaningful differences among the latter. As qualitative works which involve similar types of analysis
have noted, a small qualitative study cannot make causal claims; therefore, the analysis in this study
should be read as helpful descriptions to guide the formation of hypotheses about the mechanisms
and processes that might underlie variations in food security, and the role of the SNAP program.
FINDINGS
General Financial Circumstances and the Role of SNAP in Beneficiaries’
Finances
The fundamental reality of most SNAP recipients’ lives is that expenses often outstrip income.
SNAP households experience both recurring and episodic financial strain that is eased but not
alleviated in full by participation in the SNAP program. SNAP allows families to set aside more
easily a portion of their resources—SNAP—for food, and to prioritize a healthier, more consistent
diet without compromising as much on obligations such as rent, utilities, transportation, and other
basic needs. Families in this study often build their monthly budgets around SNAP, allocating their
fungible cash resources toward their bills and other, often urgent, financial needs triggered by a

Executive Summary

xii

sudden loss of income or increase in expenditure. SNAP eases the financial tradeoffs families must
make as they strive to bring their budgets into balance, and may stave off material hardship in a
variety of domains. Nonetheless, the families in this study do frequently run short of the financial
resources necessary to purchase all of the food that they need. We show that though many recipients
experience these shortfalls routinely—as often as the end of every month—few earmark additional
cash resources for food. These resources are often fully allocated to other purposes. However,
households who run out of food benefits toward the end of the month frequently find ways of
allocating some additional cash for food even though it may not have been earmarked earlier.
Financial struggle often occurs despite access to the social safety net, as well as the significant
efforts families make at belt tightening: keeping the lights off to lower the utility bill, or even
forgoing a trip to church to save on fuel. It also occurs despite the fact that families often “juggle”:
they pay some of their bills while negotiating with or even defaulting on other creditors. These
practices, besides incurring late fees and reconnection charges, put many households in serious
debt—debt that constrains future access to credit. Other strategies include doubling up with
relatives, gleaning other kinds of network support, running up credit cards, and bringing in small
amounts of extra cash via entrepreneurial activities such as braiding hair or selling tin cans or
plasma. However, these ways of dealing with overburdened monthly budgets have sharp limitations
and are not equally available to all.
Differences Among the Food Secure and Food Insecure Related to Food
Hardships and Coping Strategies
Financial Shortfalls and Food Security
A household is “food secure” if it has access at all times to enough food for an active, healthy
life for all its members and “food insecure” if it has difficulty getting enough food because of a lack
of resources. Households that experienced particularly severe levels of food insecurity are designated
as having “very low food security.” Similarly, in this report, the term “financial shortfall” is used to
mean a situation where a family is unable to pay one or more of its non-food bills for a month or
more.
The families interviewed in our study typically manage their food budgets with great care, but
small changes in income or expenditures can result in an episode of food hardship. A job loss, the
birth of a child, a medical emergency or expensive prescription, or the high cost of gasoline can
precipitate an unstable situation in which families must make sacrifices to maintain their food
security. We found the following triggers of financial shortfall, in order of frequency: (1) temporal
variation in resources or expenses; (2) unusually high recurring expenses, (3) unexpected and sudden
financial shocks in income or expenditure, and (4) loss or reduction in benefits from government
programs.
As would be expected, there are strong associations between the financial shortfalls we
document with regard to food and the level of food security a household was experiencing at the
time of the survey. We found that the less food secure the household is, the more likely it is that a
household has experienced a financial shortfall due to an abrupt loss of income or a sudden increase
in expenses. Also, households with very low food security are more likely to report a financial
shortfall due to high recurring expenses such as prescription drugs or, for those with a considerable
commute to work, gasoline for the car. Finally, we note what appears to be a strong relationship
between experiencing a financial shortfall due to a disruption in government benefits and household

Executive Summary

xiii

food security status as measured by the quantitative SNAPFS survey. Most typically, this relates to
the loss of or reduction in SNAP benefits due to changes in income or failure to comply with
program recertification requirements or administrative error. Notably, no household in the food
secure group reported that an unexpected drop in government benefits triggered a spell of financial
hardship.
Food Coping Strategies and Food Security
We found that respondents employed coping strategies that are both reactive—to deal with
food hardship—and proactive—to avoid it. The latter type include (1) restricting food intake; (2)
altering the kinds of foods consumed; (3) turning to networks; (4) visiting food pantries; and (5)
scouring the ads for sales, traveling from store to store several times a month to ensure the best
bargains, and planning meals almost entirely around the sales.
We also noted differences in coping strategies used across food security levels. The least food
secure were considerably more likely to say they had to restrict food intake—skip meals—to cope
with a shortfall than those who were more food secure. This is not surprising, as the definition of
food security takes skipping meals into account. Note, however that there were a number of food
secure households who report routinely skipping meals; they do so with such regularity that it is
considered routine and may thus be under-reported. There was also a notable relationship between a
household’s food security status and whether it changed the type of food it consumed toward the
end of the month to cope with a shortfall, such as by shifting from meat to ramen noodles.
Another coping strategy that differed by food security status was related to family networks. We
found that a significant minority of the food secure households take advantage of frequent
invitations to relatives’ homes for meals and receive contributions of groceries and cash from their
family and friends. These households can usually rely on their networks to provide cash, groceries,
or meals when SNAP benefits run out toward the end of the month. Those who are less food secure
have less access to such resources. In fact, households with very low food security often explicitly
state they do not have networks that are able or willing to provide. And even those in this group
who do often cannot rely on them, usually because the donor is in a financial situation similar to
their own. Those who shared their SNAP with others not in the official SNAP household were also
clustered in the very low food security group, suggesting that when respondents extend charity to
the even less fortunate, it is costly to their own well-being.
Finally, those households who are the least food secure are also the least likely to engage in a
key form of proactive coping. This strategy involves carefully researching the best prices on
particular products, traveling to multiple grocery stores—sometimes a considerable distance away—
several times a month to capitalize fully on sales, and carefully planning the meals around what is on
sale rather than on the households’ food preferences. Managing one’s food budget in this way
requires considerable skill, and this skill is often richly evident in the narratives of the food secure.
Strategies Households Use to Meet Food Needs
SNAP recipients are usually strategic in trying to stretch their SNAP benefits out over the
course of the month. Yet most households also reported that they compromised nutrition and
variety in their diets to ensure that they could provide enough food for the least expense. Though
most families are conscientious in trying to provide a balanced meal every day for dinner, nearly all
emphasize that they would shop differently—buying fresh vegetables instead of frozen, or leaner

Executive Summary

xiv

cuts of meat or fish—if their food budgets permitted. To ensure that their food budget stretches,
many households clip coupons and compare prices across stores, but some are particularly adept at
shopping avidly for bargains, shopping often and at several different stores to capitalize on sales,
and carefully planning their menus around items that are on sale rather than on what the family
would prefer to eat. However, few among those lowest in food security are able to employ these
more elaborate strategies, in part because their overall circumstances are less stable (more have had
to double up and more have experienced a recent financial shock, for example).
Many of the especially savvy shoppers are able to build reserves of cheap non-perishable foods
for leaner financial times. These reserves are drawn upon at the end of the month, when SNAP
benefits are often gone, at times of the year when expenses typically rise or revenues fall, and in the
face of a financial shock. Despite numerous cost-cutting strategies, most families find that they must
maintain a repetitive diet of lesser quality to keep their family fed throughout the month.
Eating and Food Dynamics within the Household
Respondents mostly eat simple meals for breakfast and lunch, favoring foods that are quick to
prepare, especially pre-packaged “instant” items. Yet most respondents also express considerable
awareness of, and concern over, the need to provide nutritious, balanced meals and focus on dinner
to meet that need. Most say they cannot afford to consume the healthy diet they would wish to, but
do adopt their cooking strategies to make the diet they can afford as healthy as possible. For
example, a few bake rather than fry meat, and most make sure to serve vegetables—even if frozen or
canned—with the evening meal, while also providing ample starches to ensure that no one goes to
bed hungry. Many try to instill a habit of healthy eating in their children, and many parents report
that they provide their children with all the fresh fruits and vegetables they can afford. Yet children
often prefer food with little nutritional value, and parents sometimes “splurge” so they can buy their
children an occasional “treat” such as ice cream. When families entertain—usually to celebrate a
birthday—many report often saving for months to be able to afford any extra food expenditures
such occasions require.
While parents strive to deploy their SNAP benefits to maintain consistent and nutritious meals
for their children (and generally succeed), a striking number—nearly half—report restricting their
own food intake to ensure their children have enough to eat throughout the month. This is
especially likely for the least food secure but is also evident for a sizeable minority of the food
secure. Skipping meals is frequent in this sample of SNAP participants, so much so that such
sacrifices have become routine and are seldom defined as food hardship; many say that they
intentionally skip meals to ensure they will have enough food to last through the month. Those with
health problems within the household, such as diabetes or food allergies, are often unable to adjust
their diets to avoid sacrifice, or to fully accommodate their illness.
Role of SNAP in Helping Households Meet Family Food Needs
For most households, the SNAP benefit is not meant to cover all a family’s food needs in a
given month, because the family is expected to buy some food from its own resources.
Nevertheless, families often indicate that SNAP is a “lifesaver”. It enables them to buy more and
healthier food than they otherwise might by ensuring that a portion of their resources—the SNAP
benefit—is devoted solely to food. It also helps parents ensure that their children seldom suffer
food hardship, even if they themselves must go without. SNAP can also prevent hardship in other
domains, as cash resources are often fully devoted to bills and other critical financial needs. When

Executive Summary

xv

families lose SNAP—a more common occurrence among the less food secure—they often forgo
paying bills (credit cards, the phone bill, the utilities, or even the rent) to ensure that their children
can eat, but the food they consume during these times is less plentiful and less nutritious.
Beneficiaries often complain that their SNAP is exhausted in two or three weeks; this is especially so
for the least food secure, in part because they seldom employ the elaborate money-saving grocery
shopping techniques that are evident for about a quarter of those in the other, more food secure,
groups.
Interestingly, many households organize their budgets around the expectation that SNAP will
suffice for the whole month. This expectation is seldom realized among any group, but is an
expectation especially common among the very low food secure. Even though experience might
indicate that they must also earmark a portion of their cash resources for food, they generally do
not. But even if they desired to do so, frequent budget shortfalls and income shocks might make it
exceedingly difficult, if not impossible, to earmark much cash for food needs, especially among the
least food secure, for whom income shocks were most common.
Most families at all food security levels had to usually scramble to some degree to meet their
food needs at the end of the month. For those with strong, generous networks—more common
among the more food secure—the scramble was greatly eased. Because SNAP is often central to
households’ food planning, the loss of or a reduction in SNAP benefits, even for a brief period, can
have a catastrophic impact on the family budget. Respondents often complain that even small
changes in earnings can lead to destabilizing benefit reductions, and that a slight paperwork delay at
the periodic renewal can result in the loss of SNAP for a month or more. The loss of other
government benefits leads to financial shortfalls as well, but none plays as large of a role as SNAP.
Many respondents complained about what they perceive as caseworker error or administrative
issues such as the long waits at the Public Assistance office when reapplication requires in-person
visits that can take hours away from work and wages. Many say that these strains are intensified by
the negative attitudes of SNAP caseworkers, whom beneficiaries commonly perceive to be apathetic
toward their plight and rude in face-to-face interactions. These characterizations stand in strong
contrast to WIC, which is perceived favorably. Most respondents reported not having received any
nutrition education advice or instruction from the SNAP program. By contrast, clients who were in
both SNAP and WIC often cited the nutrition education they had received from WIC as being very
useful. Overall, many respondents expressed a need for additional nutrition education assistance in
SNAP.
POTENTIAL DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
The study’s findings suggest several directions for future research.
? Obtaining detailed information about fluctuations in household expenses and income.
This would include seeking more detailed information about SNAP participants’
expenditures and incomes just after entering SNAP and following them through the first
few months. It would allow researchers and policymakers to understand how households
reallocate scarce income resources once they receive SNAP benefits to meet obligations
such as rent, utilities, transportation, and other basic needs.
? Exploring family networks as a food coping strategy. Obtaining more detailed
information related to households’ access to family networks and the role of family

Executive Summary

xvi

networks in alleviating food insecurity would offer a greater understanding of the
availability of help from family, friends, and community members; the extent to which
households use these resources; and how this use varies throughout the month.
? Food access and proactive coping strategies to maintain food security. More research is
needed on how households make food purchase decisions and how this relates to food
security. In particular, more information is needed about the extent to which the
proactive coping strategies described in the in-depth interviews help to alleviate food
insecurity.
? The relationship between physical and mental health in needing SNAP. The findings in
the current study suggest that health issues, both mental and physical, may contribute
substantially to patterns of SNAP use—both in determining patterns of entry and exit
and also in altering the probability of long term dependency. However, more research is
needed about the incidence of such health-related factors in the SNAP population.
? Planning for the end of the month, when SNAP benefits typically run out. The findings
in this study suggest that many households fail to budget money with which to buy food
after exhausting their SNAP benefits. More research is needed to determine whether
this is an aspect of the program that is not communicated adequately to participants, and
if so, how the program can change this disconnect between program users and design.
? WIC versus SNAP – What works best in one that could be applied to the other? Many
of our respondents seemed to feel that WIC could serve as a “model” program and
could potentially offer ideas for improving SNAP. Additional interviewing of households
participating in both programs would be useful, in order to focus more directly on
comparing them. Such detailed probing might also be able to shed additional light on
reasons for various attitudes expressed and the degree to which those attitudes are
experience-based.
Much of the research suggested above might reasonably consist of a combination of in-depth
interviews to obtain input from SNAP recipients, together with standard survey methods to obtain
data for related quantitative analyses. For example, for fluctuations in expenditures and income,
SNAP participants might provide input about expenditures and income through in-depth interviews,
but standard survey methods could be used to learn about the actual fluctuations in circumstances
that occur over time. For the relationship between SNAP use and physical and mental health,
research could potentially involve a combination of closed-ended survey methods to obtain detailed
information about health histories over time and also in-depth interviewing to obtain information on
how respondents believe that health factors have affected them and their participation in SNAP.



1

I. INTRODUCTION

The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), the largest of the 15 food and
nutrition assistance programs administered by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), is a
central component of our nation’s nutrition assistance safety net. SNAP provides nutrition
assistance benefits and some nutrition education services to low-income individuals and families in
an effort to reduce hunger and improve the health and well-being of low-income people nationwide.
This current report examines the dynamics of the detailed mechanisms by which SNAP affects
the food security of its recipients. USDA and other researchers have increasingly used food security
status both as a measure to assess the incidence of nutrition issues in the general population and as
an outcome measure in evaluating SNAP and other public food programs. A household is “food
secure” if it has access at all times to enough food for an active, healthy life for all its members. A
food insecurity definition applies when households have difficulty getting enough food because a lack
of resources. Food security research has focused on prevalence of food insecurity, as in the volumes
of “Household Food Security in the United States” reports published annually by the Economic
Research Service, USDA (Coleman-Jensen et al. 2012). These studies describe the food security of
the U.S. population for groups defined by household characteristics such as household size,
presence of children, income, and race and ethnicity. Researchers have also used food security as an
outcome measure to evaluate the effects of SNAP on food insecurity. Recent reviews of this
literature can be found in Nord and Golla (2011); Ratcliffe and McKernan (2010); and Yen et al.
(2008). Less is known, however, about the challenges low-income families face in maintaining food
security, their coping strategies to remain food secure, and the role of SNAP in helping to meet
family food needs.
Below, we present findings from the In-Depth Interview (IDI) component of the SNAP Food
Security (SNAPFS) study, which was conducted by Mathematica Policy Research for the Food and
Nutrition Service of the USDA from October 2011 through September 2012. The main effort of the
SNAPFS study examines the association between SNAP and food security for SNAP households
just entering the program and households enrolled in SNAP for approximately six to seven months
via a series of quantitative telephone surveys of close to 10,000 households. This piece of that effort,
conducted between February 2012 and June 2012, describes 90 in-depth qualitative discussions held
with SNAP households with children in six states about their financial situations, their use of SNAP,
and their overall food security. Interviews were held in the homes of the respondents, unless they
preferred to meet in a public location like a library or coffee shop. Interview questions focused on
expenditures and income, SNAP and food shopping habits, eating habits, nutrition, and triggers of
food hardship and food-related coping strategies. The purpose of this formative, qualitative study
was to provide important insights into the challenges low-income families face and the coping
strategies developed and used in these households with the goal of maintaining their family’s food
security. Insights gained from this effort will help to inform the direction of future research on food
security at the household level, aid in the generation of hypotheses, and help guide future research
instrument design.



2

A. Design of the SNAPFS In-Depth Interview Survey
The sample of respondents for the SNAPFS IDI survey was drawn from the main sample used
in the full SNAPFS telephone survey.1

The telephone survey collected information from 9,811
SNAP households in 30 States from October 2011 through February 2012. This group consisted of
6,436 new-entrant households and 3,375 households that had participated in SNAP for about six
months (for convenience, we refer to them as six-month households).2

The IDI respondent sample
was drawn from participants in six of the 30 states and consisted only of households with children.
IDI respondents were offered an incentive of a $30 gift card to a local store for completing the
interview.
From the set of 30 States participating in the SNAPFS telephone survey, we selected those in
which to conduct IDIs using an algorithm designed (1) to achieve a higher degree of geographic
diversity than we would through a random selection of States, and (2) to produce enough household
respondents from the telephone survey to obtain 90 IDIs. Sample size was a particular concern,
because IDIs were conducted only with households with children.
The first step in selecting the set of States in which to conduct SNAPFS IDIs was to define
central geographic areas within States in which to conduct interviews. We used Core-Based
Statistical Areas (CBSAs) to define geographic areas. CBSAs are county based and, for large
metropolitan areas, usually cover the core city and the surrounding subcities and/or suburbs. In
some cases, because of the county-based definition, they include semirural areas as well.
We selected the SNAPFS IDI sample of States prior to the SNAPFS telephone survey data
collection period. Therefore, to ensure that an adequate sample of households would complete the
baseline telephone interview, we estimated the number of households with children that would
complete the telephone survey in each CBSA. This was equal to the product of (1) the percentage of
the State’s overall population residing in the CBSA, (2) a 50 percent factor to approximate the
percentage of SNAP households that have children, and (3) the predicted number of completed
household telephone interviews in the State. Because CBSAs can extend across State lines, we first
subtracted the CBSA’s population in adjoining States for each CBSA and then computed the
percentage of the State’s overall population residing in each CBSA.
We used a multistage design to select the sample of IDI households. In the first stage, we
randomly selected two of the four Census regions of the country (northeast and south) to contribute
“large” CBSAs and the other two regions (midwest and west) to contribute “small” ones. In the
northeast and south, we randomly selected a CBSA from a set of the largest CBSAs in each region.
In the midwest and west, we randomly selected a CBSA from a set of the smallest CBSAs in each
region. The four CBSAs selected, and the States in which they are primarily located, were:
? Boston-Cambridge-Quincy, Massachusetts
? Houston-Sugarland-Baytown, Texas
1 A comprehensive description of the SNAPFS telephone survey design is in that study’s main report.
2 The new-entrant households from October 2011 to February 2012 were asked to complete a follow-up interview
about six months later, from April 2012 to early September 2012.



3

? Indianapolis-Carmel, Indiana
? Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, California
Within several weeks of completing interviews for the SNAPFS telephone survey in each of
these four States, we began calling household respondents to request participation in the IDI survey
and to schedule the interviews. The interviews, conducted between February 2012 and June 2012,
usually took place in the respondents’ homes. On occasion, at the request of the respondent, they
were scheduled in a public place such as a restaurant, library, or community center. After several
weeks of interviewing, the percentage of household respondents that had failed to show for the
interview was larger than expected. Therefore, we decided to expand the initial geographic sample
areas to include neighboring areas so that we could obtain a sufficient number of completed
interviews. Additional interviews were conducted in Los Angeles, California; Dallas, Texas; Chicago,
Illinois; and Providence, Rhode Island. In total, 251 households were contacted to participate in the
survey. Of the 126 that agreed to participate we completed 90 interviews for an overall response rate
of about 35.9 percent.3

Respondents who during the initial telephone contact had agreed to
participate but subsequently did not either were not home for the interview or, if the interview was
to be held in a public place, did not show up for the interview and did not reschedule. About 62
percent of the IDI sample (56 of the 90 households) consisted of households that were new entrants
at the time of the SNAPFS baseline survey. The distribution of completed interviews and no-shows
by State is shown in Table I.1.
Table I.1. SNAPFS In-Depth Interview Survey Household Response Information

Contacted

Scheduled
Interviews

Completed
Interviews
California 37 24 18
Illinois 45 19 15
Indiana 34 12 7
Massachusetts 34 14 12
Rhode Island 37 17 11
Texas 64 40 27
Total 251 126 90
B. Research Questions and Survey Topics
The objective of the SNAPFS IDI survey was to provide important insights into the challenges
low-income families face and the coping strategies they deploy to remain food secure, and to inform
the direction of future research on food security, including hypothesis generation and instrument
design. The survey explored four main research questions:
3 This response rate in this survey should be interpreted with caution. Our purpose was to draw a heterogeneous
group of SNAP households with children, not to generate a representative sample. Indeed, our sample size is too small
to claim representativeness, regardless of how respondents were recruited. To this end, we chose households at random
from CBSAs and offered them the chance to participate. They had to do so in a very narrow window of time—usually a
matter of two to five days—in which our interviewers were visiting their area of the state. Sample members that were
not available during those times were often not able to be included as participants.



4

1. What are families’ financial circumstances, hardships, and coping strategies generally?
2. What strategies do households use to meet family food needs?
3. What is the role of SNAP in helping households meet family food needs?
4. What challenges do families face that limit their ability to maintain food security?
To answer these questions, we developed an interview protocol based on prior, related
qualitative studies of the financial lives of low-income households (Edin and Lein 1997; Mendenhall
et al. 2012; Seefeldt 2008). The full interview protocol is in Appendix A. The questions were
grouped into these categories:
? Bills/expenditures. Housing, utilities, communications, credit card, child care,
transportation, medical insurance, food; strategies for meeting expenditures
? Food security. Bouts of food insecurity; coping strategies
? Food dynamics and food eating. With whom does respondent share food? Who
cooks?
? SNAP and food shopping. Where does respondent typically shop? What does
respondent buy?
? Eating out and take-out. When and under what circumstances do household
members eat out or purchase take-out food?
? SNAP and food security. When did households first apply for SNAP? Other food
programs they participate in; experiences in the SNAP office; discussions within the
household about what to eat; household dynamics and associated challenges
? Health, food, and nutritional knowledge. Food allergies; health; healthy eating;
children’s diets
? Expenditures and income. Seasonal changes in expenditures; covering expenditures;
household income; coping strategies when income low or expenditures high
C. Analysis
Narrative analysis is a powerful tool for describing important contextual details and for
suggesting causal processes that could be shaping behavior. While the IDIs resemble semistructured
conversations, we applied systematic, consistent analysis to translate the interviews into research
findings.
The IDIs produced roughly 50 pages of transcribed interview data for each respondent; for a
total of about 4,500 pages of text. These transcribed data were coded systematically by theme; each
theme relating to one of the central questions outlined above (for example, food coping strategies).
Each thematic code was then systematically analyzed for content (i.e. identifying the frequency and
range of food coping strategies employed). This analysis was largely descriptive. However, for each
theme, we assessed whether there were especially large differences by food security level (food

secure, low food security, very low food security) and by race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic white, non-
Hispanic black, Hispanic, and Other). We note especially large differences in these variables in this

report. For instance, in Chapter III we point to several especially notable differences in the kinds of



5

events that trigger a shortfall in the financial resources needed to secure food across food security
groups, and several fairly large differences in food-related coping strategies.
It is important to recognize that, as qualitative analyses which involve similar techniques have
noted (Boyd et al. 2010; Clampet-Lundquist et al. 2011; Edin and Lein 2007; England and Edin
2007), a small qualitative study like this effort cannot make definitive causal claims or estimate the
precise magnitude of the patterns we note. Rather, this analysis should be used as one resource to
use to generate hypotheses about the mechanisms and processes that might underlie variations in
food security, and inform the design of future research tools.
After audio recording and transcribing all the interviews, we reviewed the questions covered in
the conversations and identified “codes”, or topics with which to categorize respondents’ answers.
An example of a code is “SNAP use and experience”. We then identified “themes”, which are more
detailed categories within each code. Examples of themes within “SNAP use and experience”
include “SNAP and food shopping” and “nutrition education.” The codes and themes within each
code were:
? General economic situation. Income; expenses; government assistance; financial
struggles; and financial coping strategies
? Food security. Food expenses; food hardship; food hardship coping strategies
? SNAP use and experience. SNAP amount; SNAP and food shopping; SNAP tenure;
no SNAP; nutrition education; other food programs
? Food purchasing. Grocery store experience; eating out and take-out
? Eating and food dynamics. Meals; household sharing of meals
? Healthy and unhealthy food. Health issues; cultural food practices
? Support ideas. Ideas for changing elements of SNAP
We coded transcribed interviews by theme using Atlas.ti, a computer-assisted qualitative data
analytic software package. Next, we created a report, consisting of dialogue from the interviews, for
each theme. These reports were sorted by food security level and by race/ethnicity to ensure we
could identify especially large differences across these groups. We then wrote an internal
memorandum summarizing the analysis of each theme and its subthemes. To ensure consistency
across the memos, a standard format was followed for each memo, and each report was carefully
reviewed. The analysis memos served as the foundation of this qualitative report.
In this report, we qualify findings based on the prevalence of household responses by using
words such as “many”, “most”, “almost”, and so on. The following is a general guide for these
phrases:
? “Virtually all” means more than 95 percent of respondents
? “Almost all” means more than 90 percent of respondents
? “Most” means more than two-thirds of respondents
? “Many” means more than half of respondents, but less than two-thirds of respondents
? “About half” means about 50 percent of respondents



6

? A “substantial minority” or “quite a few” mean less than half, but more than a third of
respondents
? “Some” means less than a third of respondents
? “Almost none” means less than 10 percent of respondents
? “Virtually none” means less than 5 percent of respondents
D. Characteristics of the SNAPFS IDI Survey Sample
In this section, we present characteristics and circumstances of the IDI survey sample. This
information was gathered at the time of the SNAPFS telephone interview and thus may not reflect
all the household circumstances at the time of the IDI.
About 62 percent of the IDI sample (56 of the 90 households) consisted of households that
were new entrants at the time of the SNAPFS baseline survey. By the time of the IDI, they had been
participating for about one to two months. The remaining households had participated in SNAP for
about six months at the time of the baseline survey, or about seven to nine months at the time of
the IDI.
The majority (85 percent) of both new-entrant and six-month households were headed by a
female (Table I.2). Respondents were, on average, in their mid-thirties. Close to 38 percent of
respondents were Hispanic. Black, non-Hispanic respondents made up the second-most-common
racial/ethnic group (31.1 percent), followed by white, non-Hispanic respondents (24.4 percent) and
non-Hispanic-other respondents (11.1 percent). About 24 percent of respondents had not
completed high school. A similar percentage had received a high school diploma or GED but had
not progressed beyond high school. Almost 45 percent of respondents had some college.
Table I.2. Demographic Characteristics and Household Composition of Survey Participant
Households and Household Heads
Percentage of Household Heads that are Female 84.4
Average Age (in years) of Household Head 34.6
Race/Ethnicity of Household Head
Non-Hispanic, white 24.4
Non-Hispanic, black 31.1
Non-Hispanic, other 11.1
Hispanic 37.8
Highest Grade Completed of Household Head
Less than high school 23.6
High school graduate (diploma or GED) 23.6
Some college 44.9
College and beyond 7.9
Households with Children
Single adult 52.2
Multiple adults 47.8
Household Size
1 Persona 0.0
2 Person 25.6
3 Person 33.3
4 Person 16.7
5 Person 12.2
6+ Person 12.2
Percentage of Households with an Elderly Member 5.6



7

Percentage of Households with a Disabled Member 17.8
Source: SNAP Food Security 2012, IDI Sample.
Note: Table entries are percentages unless otherwise indicated. All statistics are unweighted.
Characteristics and circumstances were measured at the time of the SNAPFS telephone
interview, which preceded the in-depth interview by one to three months.

a
Because the survey was administered only to households with children, all households contained at least
two members.
This study was designed to interview only households with children. More than half the sample
(52.2 percent) consisted of single-adult households with children, and households generally
contained two people (25.6 percent) or three people (33.3 percent). A small percentage of
households contained an elderly member (5.6 percent); a larger percentage contained a disabled
person (17.8 percent).
As presented in Table I.3, 58.4 percent of respondents were not employed. Those that were
employed were three times more likely to be employed full-time (31.5 percent) than part-time (10.1
percent). Over 70 percent of the sample households had monthly gross incomes below the poverty
level.4
More than one-fifth of households had zero income. Finally, nearly a quarter of households
received financial support from friends or family. Some households also received Social Security
benefits (15.7 percent), child support (14.6 percent), TANF (7.8 percent), SSI (6.8 percent), and
unemployment insurance benefits (6.7 percent).
Table I.3. Employment Status, Household Income, and Sources of Income of Survey Participant
Households and Household Heads
Employment Status of Household Head
Employed full-time 31.5
Employed part-time 10.1
Not employed 58.4
Monthly Income as a Percentage of Poverty
No income 22.2
1 to 50 percent 17.8
51 to 100 percent 31.1
101 to 130 percent 12.2
More than 130 percent 16.7
Percentage of Households with Income Type
TANF 7.8
Social Security 15.7
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) 6.8
Unemployment insurance or worker’s compensation benefits 6.7
Child support payments 14.6
Financial support from friends or family 23.3
Source: SNAP Food Security 2012, IDI Sample.
4 This is measured as a household’s gross income relative to the SNAP income eligibility standards for Fiscal Year
2011 [http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/government/FY11_Income_Standards.htm]. The standards represent 100 percent
of the poverty level for each household size and closely resemble the Department of Health and Human Services
poverty guidelines.



8

Note: Table entries are percentages unless otherwise indicated. All statistics are unweighted.
Characteristics and circumstances were measured at the time of the SNAPFS telephone
interview, which preceded the in-depth interview by one to three months.
More than half the sample households had participated in SNAP prior to their current spell
(Table I.4). Almost 40 percent of households received a SNAP benefit which exceeded $301; 24.1
percent had benefits between $201 and $300, and another quarter (27.9 percent) received between
$101-200 dollars per month. Less than nine percent of the IDI sample (8.9 percent) received less
than $100 per month.
Many households participated in other federal nutrition assistance programs as well: 71.2 and
61.7 percent of households with children aged 5 to 18 participated in NSLP and SBP, respectively,
and 34.6 percent of households with women aged 15 to 45 or children under 5 participated in WIC.
Table I.4. Participation in SNAP and Other Food and Nutrition Assistance Programs by Survey
Participant Households
Prior SNAP Participation 55.1
Benefit Amount
$0 to $100 8.9
$101 to $200 27.9
$201 to $300 24.1
$301 or more 39.2
Percentage of Households with Children Aged 5 to 18 that Participate in NSLP 71.2
Percentage of Households with Children Aged 5 to 18 that Participate in SBP 61.7
Percentage of Households with Women Aged 15 to 45 or Children Aged less
than 5 that Participate in WIC

34.6

Source: SNAP Food Security 2012, IDI Sample.
Note: Table entries are percentages unless otherwise indicated. All statistics are unweighted.
Characteristics and circumstances were measured at the time of the SNAPFS telephone
interview, which preceded the in-depth interview by one to three months.
Table I.5 presents the food security status of adults and children in the sampled households.
Adult food security was measured using the 10-item adult scale of the food security module of the
Current Population Survey, and children’s food security was measured using the additional 8-item
child food security module (Nord and Bickel 2002). Based on the adult measure, over a third (37.8
percent) of surveyed households were food secure, and 62.2 percent of households were food
insecure. Of the food insecure group, 24.4 percent experienced low food security and 37.8 percent
had very low food security. Based on the children’s food security measure, 42.2 percent of
households had children who experienced some food insecurity, with 21.1 percent of those having
children with very low food security.
Table I.5. Adult and Child Food Security Status of Survey Participant Households
Adult Food Security Status
Food secure 37.8
Food insecure 62.2
Food insecure with low food security 24.4
Food insecure with very low food security 37.8
Child Food Security Status



9

Food secure 57.8
Food insecure 42.2
Food insecure with low food security 21.1
Food insecure with very low food security 21.1
Source: SNAP Food Security 2012, IDI Sample.
Note: Table entries are percentages unless otherwise indicated. All statistics are unweighted.



10

II. GENERAL FINANCIAL CIRCUMSTANCES AND THE ROLE OF SNAP IN

BENEFICIARIES’ FINANCES

A. Overview
This chapter outlines the broad contours of SNAP beneficiaries’ economic lives—their monthly
incomes, major expenses, and overall balance sheets. We find that the typical household reports that
they have more “month” than money—their expenses exceed their income. Since few can live off
past or future income, this budget imbalance has a profound effect on their financial lives. Belt
tightening, juggling the bills, doubling up, asking relatives and friends for assistance, “hustling” and
relying on credit are all ways in which families get by.
What is SNAP's role in the family's financial picture? For most, SNAP is the basic building
block of the monthly budget, ensuring that a household has some resources set aside for the one
item they cannot go without—food. SNAP also frees up vital cash that would have had to be spent
on food to help bridge budget gaps in other areas. SNAP eases the financial tradeoffs families must
make as they strive to bring their budgets into balance, and may stave off material hardship.
Nonetheless, the families in this study do frequently run short of the financial resources needed to
purchase all of the food that they need. We show that this is in part because families do not typically
earmark cash resources for food—they are often fully allocated to other purposes.
B. Budgets Out of Balance
To get a rough sense of each household’s typical monthly budget, we asked them to describe
their five largest monthly expenses, and then probed for expenses in all major domains—rent,
utilities, food, and transportation, and so on — last month and in the months immediately prior to
construct a monthly average. The probing questions were designed to determine the amount spent
and whether the household was struggling to meet that expense. For example, we asked “How about
utilities—heat, light, water and sewer? Tell me about the last time you struggled to pay your any of
these bills”; “What about your credit payments? Tell me about the last time you struggled to meet
these payments”; and similar questions (see Appendix A for a list of all questions). We then asked
them to describe all sources of revenue coming into the household over the past six months. “Now
let’s talk about how you cover these expenses. Tell me about all the resources—big and small—that
came into the household last month.” Interviewers were instructed to probe for exact monthly
amounts, and to probe for formal and informal income (for example, financial help from family and
friends, “under the table” jobs, and so on). Interviewers were also reminded to solicit information
about income from all sources for all household members (for example, not to forget contributions
from teenage children that might have a job, fathers of children, and so on). Interviewers also asked
how household income varied over the past year and the last time the household went without
income (Appendix A).
In this way, we were able to construct a typical monthly budget. When we compared income to
expenses, we found that in the typical month, many households’ expenses exceeded their income.
Most households could point to at least one month in the recent past where they lacked the
resources to pay all of their expenses. Even households who were consistently in the black seldom
had much cash left over once basic needs were met. This fundamental economic reality—the frequency of
budget shortfalls—profoundly shaped the role SNAP played in families’ economic lives. When income falls short of
expenses, tradeoffs are required; not all the bills can be paid, or be paid on time.



11

Accordingly, many were behind on credit card or other debt payments, and many routinely
could not pay their utility bills on time; some reported recent interruptions in service. Loss of cable,
internet, or cell phone service was even more common. And though families usually made paying
their rent or mortgage a priority, quite a few had also missed or made late payments in the recent
past. Several households in the study had recently been evicted or had left their apartments for the
homes of family members because they could no longer pay the rent; doubling up was common
among those in our sample.
C. Tradeoffs and Strategies
What tradeoffs must households make, and what strategies do they deploy, when there is not
enough money to get through the month? Interviewers were provided with a series of closely related
questions to guide the respondent through this conversation. For example, “A lot of people say
there is a lot of month left at the end of the money. How about for you? Over the last year, how
have you coped during time where money was tight? Tell me all about the last time that happened?
What about the time before that? How do you typically cope when the money gets tight? Tell me
about the last time you ran short of what you needed to pay for food. How did you cope? How
about the time before that? What do you typically do when the food budget gets tight?”
We learned that they tighten their belts, juggle, double up, draw on their networks, “hustle,” and
pay with credit.
Belt tightening efforts include keeping the lights off and the shades pulled to avoid using air
conditioning in the summer heat, washing the clothes less often, and dozens of other money-saving
schemes. As the quote below shows, it can even involve driving to church less often.
“I don’t even go to church every Sunday, like I used to. I try and go every other
Sunday.
(Interviewer: Just so that you can keep down the driving?)
Yes, seriously. And it has helped. Little things have added up to make a big
difference.
(Interviewer: Yes, and what other little things can you think of?)
How often I wash clothes..., I use my neighbor’s lawnmower to do my grass you
know which is something I always had a yard guy to come in and [do].”5
Juggling—sometimes referred to as “robbing Peter to pay Paul”—involves keeping some
creditors at bay while others’ demands are satisfied. Ensuring that this strategy does not result in
further hardship—losing electric and gas service or being evicted—requires considerable skill and
takes up a surprising amount of respondents’ energy and time. Stories of sympathetic landlords are
unexpectedly common. Utility companies will also often “work with you,” and hospitals often
showed flexibility as well. Other creditors, however, were not so lenient. One respondent explained
how she juggled her bills.
5 P43: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 54, 2-person household



12

“I make it work somehow.... [The law says they can’t turn your heat off in the
winter months, but] you know that April 15th, [they start cutting your gas off]. So
you know that up until then you have the time, you [can] make a payment plan with
them. You try not to miss [your payments] and if you do miss [one] you call back
again and get one more chance to do it.... I have had times when, because I have an
illness..., I...call to avoid a shut off because I have a medical issue. So if something
[comes up] I can do [that] every once in a while. I try not to use that [strategy] unless
I’m really late.... And then my doctor will fax the paperwork over to them.... It buys
me a little time.”6
Another told us,
“Pretty much a lot of the places will work with us. Like our water bill we can pay it
two months at a time because it is so little anyway. They will wait two months before
they even give us shut off date. So we just pay that [bill] two months at a time.
Regarding our rent, they are pretty lenient because people around us are on Section 8
[too], so they just understand that we are working on it and we just let them know
and we just give them what we can on the due date and then they will let you settle
up.”7
We asked one respondent, “When you struggle financially, what do you do?” Her response
summarized the philosophy of many who must juggle their bills: “Pay what we can and don’t worry
about the rest.”8
Another was asked, “So tell me how you’re able to cover all those expenses?” She told us:
“How? You rob Peter to pay Paul. Something doesn’t get paid this month. The light bill doesn’t get
paid this month but I’ll pay the gas bill and then if you get on the payment plan you don’t pay as
much you end up paying $100 opposed to $200 or $300.” 9
Doubling up is a common tradeoff families make to bring their budgets into balance. There are
a number of three-generation households (in one case, even four) in the sample where money is
shared across generations and siblings, though most doubled-up subfamilies keep their finances
separate. Usually members of the younger generations move in with a parent or grandparent, who is
the most likely to have a stable place of residence or own a home. Such households are highly
fluid—with siblings, uncles, aunts, and other relatives coming and going as economic fortunes fall
and then rise. One respondent described her situation in this way: “[We] live with my mom and my
sister, my nephew. It seemed like everyone moved back in with mom. . . . So that’s our family for
now.”10

6 P53: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 49, 3-person household
7 P36: Food Secure, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 19, 3-person household
8 P38: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 26, 3-person household
9 P53: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 49, 3-person household
10 P27: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 31, 5-person household



13

Note that this is almost never a household’s preferred mode of living; most are eager to move
out as soon as their finances will allow. Families often value their independence, but also seek to
avoid the sharp tensions that can arise in these situations. We said to one respondent, “So a lot of
families these days, they’re doubling up; more than one family living together so they can kind of
help each other out.” She responded, “But that don’t always work, because they either always
fighting, or somebody going get killed, or got two women in the house always trying to run things,
that stuff will never work.”11
Even for those who are not doubled up and do not pool income, networks are a key method
families use to ease monthly budget strain. Respondents are quick to note, however, that this
strategy too has its limits and that not all have access to it, even if they have kin in close proximity.
We asked one respondent, “So what do you do when you can’t pay your bills?” She replied, “Well,
right now . . . because of my sickness and stuff, my mother and my sisters are trying to help me out
as much as they can. But there is only so much that they can do after they get tired of helping out.”12
Another explained,
“[My family lives here in] Chicago, yes.... But they are the type that [say], ‘You were
the one who chose to be a mother, so you deal with it. Don’t try to push your
responsibility to nobody else.’ Because of that, and that way of thinking, which is
negative, it shows no type of support emotionally or economically. It’s why I
struggle—because I feel alone.”13
For those with access to credit, credit cards help to smooth consumption when the monthly
budget is in the red; but this is a strategy that is fraught with pitfalls. One respondent described the
following scenario:
“I was paying [my monthly balance in full]—I was spending $200, $300, then I’d pay
it off. Then I’d put a little more on there, [but] then I just [couldn’t keep] up. I didn’t
have no way to pay it off. I couldn’t get no extra jobs to do this and that for nobody.
Nobody wanted me to do nothing. I said, ‘Lord why you punishing me like this?
What did I do? I’m just trying to survive.’ Then I’d get school clothes on the card
and [because the bills] was just coming hitting me left and right.... I just couldn’t
believe I went through five cards, five credit cards.”14
“Hustling” is a means to ease budget strain that includes a variety of entrepreneurial activities
such as pawning jewelry or other valuables, selling plasma, gathering aluminum cans and other
materials that can be redeemed for cash, or doing side work such as styling or braiding hair. One
respondent explained her strategy for coping with financial hardship as follows:
“I had a wedding ring I had to pawn, and Ed got me that about five years ago, but it
had to go to the pawnshop because we needed some necessities.... [There were also]
11 P54: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 44, 3-person household
12 P57: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 42, 6-person household
13 P58: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 28, 3-person household
14 P55: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 40, 8-person household



14

several things that he had had to [pawn], like [his] tools, and they had to go to the
pawn shop, because [were] struggling with food.”15
Again, these strategies have limits, as illustrated by the comment of the following respondent,
who told us: “I don’t have anything worth pawning anymore.”16
D. The Role of SNAP
SNAP considerably eased the tradeoffs families had to make when their budgets were in the
red. It enabled households to reallocate cash resources they would otherwise have spent on food to
other pressing obligations such as the light bill, a student loan payment, or even the rent. Many
families credit the SNAP program with alleviating or averting hardship in a wide variety of domains;
suggesting that it not only aids in ensuring food security but may help households to avoid other
forms of material hardship as well. Several respondents refer to it as a “lifesaver.” It is the basic
building block of most of their budgets—the stream of resources that can be counted on, to meet
their most basic material need each month. However, even with SNAP, households still struggle
financially, make difficult financial tradeoffs, and go without; most continue to invest emotional
energy, time, and creativity as they struggle to survive.
Financial difficulties occur even though most families receive significant means-tested transfers
in addition to SNAP. Many claim the Earned Income Tax Credit and have enrolled their children in
the State Child Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), and some receive Medicaid or are enrolled in a
state-sponsored medical insurance program to cover their own health needs. TANF and housing
subsidies are not as common, but some receive these as well. This is not to say that these safety net
programs are unimportant. In fact, many respondents spontaneously testified to the significance of
such programs in staving off hardship and promoting their family’s well-being. This is especially true
in regard to SNAP.
One respondent offered the following narrative about the role of SNAP in ensuring her family’s
financial wellbeing:
“It is very difficult, very difficult. I am working...part time. I’m a single mom of two,
and it seems like nothing is ever enough. No matter how many hours I put in it’s not
enough for what I need at home. I thank God that at least [I have] the SNAP
benefits. It’s the only way I can make it. Other than that, I wouldn’t have anything to
eat.”17
We discuss respondents’ views of the SNAP program more fully in Chapter V.
Households receiving SNAP are, by definition, living close to the economic margin. Parents
often believe food purchases ought to take top priority. To keep their children from going without,
they may forgo paying some bills to purchase food. But despite their willingness to tighten their
belts and make tradeoffs, most are unable to protect enough of their cash resources from the press
15 P37: Very Low Food Security, Other, Female, Age 66, 3-person household
16 P77: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 25, 2-person household
17 P58: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 28, 3-person household



15

of other financial demands. They do not typically set aside, or “earmark” a portion of their cash
income for food, even though SNAP benefits rarely stretch to cover the whole month. SNAP seems
to take concerns about securing enough food “off the table” when households decide how to
allocate their scarce cash; nearly all of their cash resources ends up being earmarked for other
purposes. Thus, financial shortfalls related to food are often a recurring problem, as we’ll show in
the next chapter.
E. Chapter II Summary
Budget shortfalls spark a cycle of juggling financial obligations. The pressure of the cycle is
alleviated, but not in full, by a household’s entry into the SNAP program. Families use SNAP
benefits to help ease the impact when expenses exceed income. SNAP benefits enable families to
maintain food as a spending priority—virtually all of the SNAP resources are spent on food—while
not falling as far behind in meeting their other obligations—rent, utilities, transportation, and
educational or medical debt—as they otherwise might. Only one respondent in the study reported
that she occasionally exchanged her SNAP benefits for cash.
Financial struggle occurs despite access to the social safety net, as well as the significant, and
sometimes valiant, efforts families make at belt tightening: keeping the lights off to lower the utility
bill, clipping coupons and traveling to multiple stores to get the best bargains, and even forgoing a
trip to church to save on fuel.
In addition, families often “juggle”: they pay some of their bills while negotiating with or even
defaulting on other creditors. These practices, besides incurring late fees and reconnection charges,
put many households in serious debt—debt that constrains future access to credit. Other strategies
include doubling up with relatives, gleaning other kinds of network support, running up credit cards,
and bringing in small amounts of extra cash via entrepreneurial activities such as braiding hair or
selling plasma. However these ways of dealing with overburdened monthly budgets have sharp
limitations and are not equally available to all.
To summarize: in most cases, families’ best efforts to make ends meet—aided but not alleviated
by SNAP benefits—still fall short.



16

III. FINANCIAL SHORTFALLS RELATED TO FOOD AND COPING STRATEGIES

AMONG THE FOOD SECURE AND FOOD INSECURE

A. Overview
Families experiencing financial shortfalls related to food over the prior six months identified
four sources of the difficulties they faced. In order of frequency, these include: (1) temporal
variation, defined as changes across years, seasons, or months, in income or expenses; (2) unusually
high recurring expenses; (3) abrupt changes in income and expenditure; (4) and the unexpected loss
of or reduction in government benefits.
As one would expect, there is a strong association between not having enough SNAP or cash
on hand to buy all of the food the family needs and the level of food security a household was
experiencing at the time of the survey. We analyze similarities and differences in both the events that
produce these shortfalls and the coping strategies employed over the preceding six months by
families’ food security level (“food secure”, “low food security” and “very low food security”).
Several large differences between these groups emerge from this analysis.
Because the experience of these budget shortfalls related to food was so common, coping
strategies of one kind or another were employed by nearly all households in our sample, sometimes
in the face of a shortfall and other times to avoid it. We include both the reactive and proactive
coping strategies households relied upon when faced with these shortfalls.
Many triggers for financial hardship were common across demographic and economic groups.
For example, there was no clear pattern in temporal variations—the most common trigger of
financial shortfalls—by food security level. Some were specific to those in the “very low food
security” group. Those in this group are by far the most likely to experience financial shortfalls
related to food because of a disruption in government benefits. Most typically, this relates to the loss
of or reduction in SNAP benefits. Notably, no household in the food secure group reported that an
unexpected drop in government benefits triggered a spell of financial hardship.
Changes in SNAP benefits can occur because income or household composition changes,
because families fail to comply in full, or on time, with program requirements, or because of
administrative error. Respondent households often cite administrative error, but this may or may not
actually be the case. Those in the “very low food security” group are also roughly twice as likely to
experience a financial shock—an abrupt rise in expenses or fall in resources. High recurring
expenses were also more common among the less food secure.
Families described a variety of coping strategies they used to respond to, or avoid financial
shortfall. These coping strategies include: (1) reducing food intake; (2) reducing food quality or
variety (stretching); (3) accessing family networks for food and cash support; (4) and pro-active
preventative strategies like aggressive sales shopping, couponing, or meal planning.
Reducing food intake, skipping meals, and changing the type of food the household consumes
(trading meat for ramen noodles at the end of the month, for example) were much more common
strategies among the less food secure, though these coping mechanisms were used by at least a
substantial minority of all food security groups.
In addition, many of the food secure households benefit from frequent invitations to relatives’
homes for meals and receive contributions of groceries and cash from their family and friends.



17

These households can usually rely on their networks to provide cash, groceries, or meals routinely
when SNAP benefits run out toward the end of the month. The less food secure have less access to
these network resources. In fact, those in the very low food security group often explicitly state that
they do not have networks that are able or willing to provide. And even those in the very low food
security group who do have networks who are willing to provide often say they cannot rely on them,
usually because the potential donor is in a financial situation similar to their own.
Conversely, networks are sometimes a drag on the resources of those in the “very low food
insecure” group, but not among the food secure. Those who felt they must share their SNAP with
others not in the official SNAP household were virtually all in the very low food security group,
suggesting that when respondents’ network members are even more needy than the respondents
themselves, it can be costly to a household’s own wellbeing.
Finally, those households who are the least food secure are also the least likely to engage in key
forms of proactive coping: carefully researching the best prices on particular products, traveling to
multiple grocery stores—sometimes a considerable distance away—several times a month to
capitalize fully on sales, and carefully planning the meals around what is on sale rather than on the
households’ food preferences. Managing one’s food budget in this way requires considerable skill,
and this skill is often richly evident in the narratives of the food secure but less so among the food
insecure. It also requires some measure of stability in one’s economic and living situations, a level of
stability that was less common among the very low food insecure.
Use of food pantries, a strategy adopted by a large minority of respondents, did not vary
significantly by food security level.
B. Sources of Financial Shortfalls Related to Food
Here we focus specifically on episodes where a household runs short of SNAP or cash
resources for securing all of the food they need. We aggregate the broad range of the triggers of
these financial shortfalls into four categories, arranged in order of frequency: (1) temporal variation
in resources or expenses; (2) unusually high recurring expenses, (3) unexpected and sudden financial
shocks in income or expenditure, and (4) loss or reduction in benefits from government programs.
Temporal Variation
For SNAP recipients, as for almost all Americans, there is a temporal dimension to fat and lean
times. For low-wage workers, tax credits like the EITC that are redeemed in late winter or early
spring usually provide a significant windfall of cash, while holidays can place extraordinary strain on
the family budget. But there are temporal variations of other kinds: jobs with a seasonal dimension,
summers when the kids are out of school, the extra expenses that accrue over holidays—particularly
Christmas, and the ubiquitous shortfall in resources that occurs toward the end of the month.
Interviewers asked, “Some times of the year are easier on the food budget than others. For example,
some families tell us it’s a lot easier in months when their kids are getting free breakfast and lunch at
school. Others say it’s easier during the summer, when kids are off visiting relatives.” Then the
interviewer asked, “How about for you?” Interviewers also asked: what are the toughest times to get
by food-wise; what bills go up and down depending on the season; and how has your household
income varied over the past year (e.g. is anyone only able to work some months during the year)?
Interviewers were instructed to probe for specific amounts and to ask about increased expenses
during the winter months due to holiday shopping and heating bills (if cold climate) as well as



18

increases in food expenses during the summer due to kids being out of school. Appendix A contains
the full set of questions asked.
Temporal variation in resources or expenses is the most frequently cited trigger of financial
hardship, described by nearly six in ten (59 percent) respondents. In particular, respondents point to
summers and to holidays like Christmas—when they are expected to purchase presents and/or
special clothing for their children—along with their children’s birthday months, as the toughest
times of the year on the budget. In the summer months, when children are generally not in school,
households must provide the breakfasts and lunches their children usually receive free at school.
One mother of a teenage boy works very long hours at her job and describes the strain summer puts
on her food budget as follows:
“Summers are horrible, because [he] was home alone from 9 a.m. to 10 p.m. eating.
And then I would come home and make like a tray of chicken thighs and mashed
potatoes and I’d go lay down for like a second, and then I’d come out and all the
chicken is gone and there’s like a bowl of mashed potatoes left. I’m like ‘What the
hell!’ He’s like, ‘You ate, right?’ I’m like, ‘No’. And so he’s like, ‘I’m sorry’. I’m like,
‘Whatever’.”18
Unusually High Recurring Expenses
Some households experience food hardship because of recurring expenses that are higher than
those of most families. High recurring expenses triggered recent financial hardship for about a third
(31 percent) of respondents in our study. These budget-breakers can include unusually high costs for
fuel for those who have to commute a long way to work or school or those who must travel from
place to place as a part of their job, such as landscapers and house cleaners. One respondent, who
worked for a landscaping firm, told us about the tradeoff decisions she has to make, as well as the
strategies she deploys to cope:
“I always have to have enough for gas so like if I have $100 and I need gas in the
truck to go to work the next day or I need to [fill up the tank] I’ll even get to the
point where it’ll affect food purchases, which it has done in the last month.... I had
to do without buying food in order to put gas in the truck to go to work the next
day.... I get Food Stamps on the 5th.... Three weeks later, the food stamps are gone
so at that point, the food’s coming out of my pocket and if I have money, I have to
make that choice you know? I have to have gas in order to work to make more
money. I can do without meat, for example, which we’ve done many, many times. I
eat a lot less meat now than I ever did in my whole life because it’s so expensive.
Maybe we’ll eat macaroni and cheese and peas or something. There’s no meat so that
we have gas.”19
Other high recurring expenses include expensive prescription drugs not covered by an
insurance plan, or special foods required because of diabetes, food allergies, and other such
conditions. One respondent told us,
18 P40: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 33, 3-person household
19 P7: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 41, 4-person household



19

“I was having to choose between medicine to stay out of pain and function and try
to raise my ten year old because there are so many things I can’t do with him now
like I did my other two sons. I’m afraid that’s all [he] is going to remember of me,
that his mom was sick. So yeah, there have been times this year, the past year where
there really wasn’t enough to eat and I felt really badly about it.”20
Another also discussed the impact of her health challenges on her food budget:
“I have health issues so some things I have [to eat]—yogurt I have to eat a lot of
yogurt. If I get too much yogurt then I’ll run short on something else. I’m
underweight so they’re trying to fatten me up with all of this stuff. And I’m like, ‘I
can’t afford that!’”21
Some households report housing costs that are much higher than the average in the sample.
Generally, these respondents are downwardly mobile homeowners or renters living in high-priced
urban areas. One respondent said her rent was so high that “a lot of times like, we don’t have
enough for food. And, so that’s kind of hard.”22
Others respondents have unusually high grocery bills because they cook not only for their own
families but also for others not covered by SNAP. Having “extra mouths to feed” was by far the
most cited reason for food hardship within the “high recurring expense” category. More than one in
five (22 percent) of all respondents mentioned this as a trigger of a spell of food hardship.
Sometimes children and grandchildren move in, or call saying there is nothing to eat in the
house. Among African American households at least, strong norms often appeared to dictate that
whoever has food resources must provide meals for all. One such respondent explained, “When I
cook everybody eats. It’s not like only my children can eat. My grandson is here so I’m never going
to exclude him. His dad, my son is here. I’ll never exclude him, you know what I mean...?”23
Another related the following: “We had [my son] Juan move in so there is one more mouth to feed.
There are now two extra mouths to feed. There are other expenses also like water, electric. His son
will eat us out of house and home.”24
Even those not doubled up sometimes feel compelled to give their scarce food resources to a
family member in need, particularly if there are children in the household. One respondent explained
his situation in this way: “My son sometimes calls because he has kids, and he said, ‘Mom do you
have a piece of meat or something I could borrow?’ I get it because you know, I can’t say no. And I
say, ‘Yeah, yeah.’ Because he’s got kids, it ain’t just...him.”25

20 P78: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 54, 2-person household
21 P70: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 54, 2-person household
22 P37: Very Low Food Security, Other, Female, Age 66, 3-person household
23 P18: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 38, 4-person household
24 P68: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 31, 6-person household
25 P37: Very Low Food Security, Other, Female, Age 66, 3-person household



20

A few feel compelled to share what they have with neighbors who are worse off even than they
are—people who are ill or homeless, or who have no food. Sharing what one has fits with these
respondents’ moral and religious beliefs. One explained, “And sometimes...I’ll feed this [homeless]
guy right here named Mike..., I’ll give him some food. Or I’ll give [to] the lady straight ahead. And
she’s got cancer...and so I give her food too. You know, but the way I see it, God gives. And when
he does, you’ll be multiplied more.”26 Another said, “Last month, I, you know, used my food stamps
to help my friends, you know, they didn’t have no food so it’s like okay I got $600 of food stamps,
well, I can struggle a little bit to help somebody else.”27 And a third echoed the willingness to
“struggle a little” in order to help someone else in need, “If somebody that’s hungry and needs
something to eat or whatever, if that’s my last can of soup, I would still give it to them.”28
Notably, all the cases above were in the very low food security group, which suggests that,
compared to the networks of the households with greater food security, the networks of the least
food secure households contain more relatives and neighbors who are even worse off. The least
food secure are about twice as likely as the other groups to report an episode of food hardship
triggered by high recurring costs, for example (44 percent versus 20 and 23 percent of those with
low food security and the food secure, respectively).
Abrupt Changes in Income and Expenditure
There are two kinds of abrupt changes in income or expenditure that induce financial hardship.
The first is a sudden loss of income from a reduction of hours at work, job loss, temporary work
interruptions due to childbirth or illness, the loss of a wage-earning partner, or the reduction or loss
of cash or in-kind support from an ex-partner, family member, or friend. The second involves an
unexpected expense, such as a car breaking down, a jump in one’s health insurance premium, or
unexpected overdraft fees from the bank. More than one in four (27 percent) respondents pointed
to a financial shock of one kind or another as being a trigger of recent financial hardship.
Sometimes, these financial “shocks” come one right after the other, leading to a financial cascade.
While 14 percent of the food secure reported a recent financial shock, 28 percent of the low food
secure and fully a third of the very low food secure did so.
A Sudden Loss of Income
Some respondents experienced unexpected job losses, which altered their financial situations
dramatically. We asked one householder to describe any unexpected events that had triggered recent
hardship. She replied,
“Losing my job. I didn’t have Food Stamps so it...really hurt. I had spent the last
$400. I had got one check—the very last check I had got was for like $600. I already
knew I had to move and I already talked to the apartment complex. ‘This is
happening. I’m going to try and be out of here by the end of the month because
there is no way I’m going to be able to pay you guys this much rent.’ I had...the
26 P37: Very Low Food Security, Other, Female, Age 66, 3-person household
27 P42: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 46, 4-person household
28 P54: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 44, 3-person household



21

utility bill that I needed to pay, so I paid that utility bill and then I went ahead and I
bought food with the last money that I had.”29
Interruptions in employment due to pregnancy and childbirth were a common cause of
hardship as well. One respondent told us:
“I’m a person who’s very responsible at work. I mean, I worked before I had her.
But you see, I had to quit the job because I got pregnant...and I had vomiting and
[was] nauseous, so I couldn’t work. I was going to end up throwing up at the store or
something. And I couldn’t let that happen.... When I was working, we were doing all
right. We weren’t doing so bad because I was getting paid $7.25 [an hour].
Everything was working out fine. But now that I don’t work, we’re stuck. We don’t
know what we can do.”30
One young mother said it was the hardship that resulted from lost wages that motivated her to
apply for SNAP, and claimed that SNAP alleviated some of the hardship she believed her family
would have otherwise faced during her pregnancy. “I had [my daughter] November 20 . . . but I had
to take off two weeks earlier just because I couldn’t even [stand up]. So I had to apply for Food
Stamps and by the grace of God they gave them to me. They help so much because if it weren’t for
that, we wouldn’t be able to eat.”31
Other hardships were due to interruptions to work because of a health problem (either the
respondent or a family member). Two respondents reported broken ankles that prohibited work for
a time; cancer treatments prevented another from working; and one mother could not return to
work three months after her daughter was born, as she had planned, because her newborn required
surgery and long-term hospitalization. This respondent described her situation as follows:
“I just had my daughter and I [had been] working full time [up until she was born].
They fired me because [I couldn’t go back to work after three months due to the fact
that] my daughter had surgery.... I had applied for an extension on my FMLA and I
asked for another month and they couldn’t—they said, ‘No.’ So they fired me. And
I had...a hard pregnancy. I was in and out the hospital all the time [but I still stayed
employed]. And I was unemployed from November until—I still am.”32
The loss of a wage-earning partner from divorce, death, breakup, or incarceration was a
common hardship trigger.33 One recent divorcee offers a typical narrative:
29 P18: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 38, 4-person household
30 P35: Food Secure, Hispanic, Female, Age 20, 3-person household
31 P38: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 26, 3-person household
32 P38: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 26, 3-person household
33 An onset of doubling up could theoretically lead to hardship by increasing expenses, if the SNAP beneficiary was
the party providing shelter to destitute kin. However, in our data, our families were typically on the receiving, and not
the giving, end of such exchanges. A new baby in the household might also cause financial distress. However, families
almost never point to expenses related to childbirth as a source of financial hardship. This is perhaps because the costs
are minimal at first and largely subsumed by Medicaid, the WIC program, and network aid.



22

“It was more difficult [after the divorce] because at that time my mortgage was sky
high and I had to try to juggle that which I had to do some other things. I traded
my—I had a Suburban I traded that in. I downsized a lot. I downsized. I just
regrouped. Food, we didn’t—they weren’t hungry, no. Bills won’t get paid [before
the kids go hungry].”34
In six cases, the incarceration of a wage-earning partner was the primary cause of a recent or
ongoing hardship. A mother of one relates the following story:
“My baby’s dad, he is in jail facing a charge that was crazy and was false. False
accusations. So I got pregnant at 17, had my little girl at 18. I’m 19 now and it’s just
been hard. Being a single parent has just been hard so I’ve been trying to do
everything on my own and do what I can for her and survive...while he’s not
here.”35
In another case, a partner’s income was lost when a mother learned her partner was working for a
drug cartel. Fearing for her children’s safety, she evicted him from the house.
Interruptions to child support payments, another typical hardship trigger, can occur because of
nonpayment or a child aging out of eligibility. One respondent describes her situation as follows:
“He’s supposed to pay child support but he doesn’t want to so he keeps moving and
changing jobs. So it takes 30 days for me to not get a check before I can report it.
Then it takes 60 days before they can do something about it. And then they do a
social security search, which usually takes another 30-60 days. So now we’re on four
months and I’m calling every day. They’re getting upset with me and I understand.
But at the same time, he does this every other month. And then he’ll get a job, they’ll
find him, and he’ll work there for like three months and then leave. And it will take
about four months to find him again.”36
Hikes in Expenditures
A car breaking down can constitute a significant financial shock to a low-income household.
Given the unreliability of the cars most respondents drive, the incidence is not low. One respondent
in this situation told us, “There was a time my car had broke down. I had to pay to get that fixed. It
was around the 20th of the month, so no more food stamps, [and there was no money for food].”37
The following quote describes how an unexpected expense for a prescription drug can rob the
food budget, leading to severe strain at the end of the month:
“[The] last week of the month is horrible because . . .if that week, anything happens,
[you are going to have to go without]. For example, my son got mono four months
34 P53: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 49, 3-person household
35 P59: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 22, 3-person household
36 P40: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 33, 3-person household
37 P18: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 38, 4-person household



23

ago [during that last week of the month], and he had to be seen and he had to have
medication and so you think, ‘Okay, I’ve got $200 for food.’ [If] you go spend $88
on that and now what are you going to do? Food or medication? Well I’m going to
go ahead and spend my food money [for the medication] because he has to have the
medication and I’ll just work more or I’ll take it from somewhere else.”38
A hike in an insurance premium triggered food hardship for another, who explained, “Where I
work at, they sell the place [to new owners], so I think - I don’t know, I think it was - I started to
struggle right then because before I didn’t have to pay my insurance, my health insurance. They used
to pay it for me, so since then I’ve been struggling more.”39
From these examples, it is clear that financial shocks can be one-time events—the car breaks
down—or become recurring obligations and have more permanent effects—a sudden increase in
insurance premiums that will become an ongoing monthly challenge.
Financial Cascades
In several cases, one or more hardship-inducing events cascade, creating cumulative financial
challenges. One respondent offers the following example:
“Well, four years ago my husband died of cancer also, so four years ago that
happened to me, and that brought me down. Yeah, and then again three years ago, a
year after [I lost my husband], I lost my job...because the company closed down. So
I lost it and I was on unemployment for like two years and then unemployment
stopped. And then I tried to get a job but it’s really hard to get a job right now....
And then I got stuck with the cancer treatments and all that, so it’s been hard to go
back [to work].”40
Another respondent told us,
“[What has been difficult] is my job [loss], and then also the dad leaving us.... Yeah,
he left us when [my daughter] was like eight months or whatever.... [And then there
was when I was incarcerated for fighting that dude who was stalking me, and I lost
custody of my children]. Yeah. It’s always some dude! I’m telling you...! They are all
trouble except for the one I am with now.”41
Loss or Reduction in SNAP and Other Government Benefits
In addition to SNAP, recipients often rely on other government programs like Unemployment
Insurance, WIC, and occasionally TANF. When there is an interruption or reduction in any of these
benefits, it can cause a spell of food hardship. The loss or reduction in SNAP was the most
frequently mentioned disruption that triggered food hardship. As we will discuss further in Chapter
38 P7: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 41, 4-person household
39 P15: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 29, 6-person household
40 P57: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 42, 6-person household
41 P14: Food Secure, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 30, 3-person household



24

V, these often-unexpected changes in SNAP benefits were among respondents’ primary frustrations
with the SNAP program. The loss or reduction in government benefits was the least frequently cited
cause of financial hardship across the sample (identified by 17 percent of respondents), yet it is the
source of financial shortfalls that is most clearly associated with very low levels of food security, as
we discuss further below.
As indicated earlier, social programs, especially SNAP, often play a vital economic role in our
respondents’ lives. When benefits are lost, or even merely reduced, respondents report that
household finances are altered dramatically. We discuss in Chapter VI some of the profound
impacts of such losses. One respondent describes how a reduction in SNAP forced her to reallocate
to food the cash she had set aside for rent and other bills:
“The problem, as I explained to you, last month—they gave me all of SNAP
completely the month of April and this month they gave me only a portion. For
example, what is the date? Is it the 15th? The 15th and everything is gone. It’s all
gone from here to the end [of the month]. I am now taking it out of my pocket from
the little bit that is left from my pay. And on top of that I need to keep aside a
weekly amount for the rent and for the rest of the expenses that I explained to you—
the gas, the electricity, the cable, and [I’m not able to] because the Food Stamps are
all gone now.”42
Families also offer similar narratives to describe the impact on the budget when children age
out of TANF or survivors’ benefits. Few say they anticipated the benefit reductions; the rules of the
program and the methods used to calculate both eligibility and benefit levels are often not well
understood. Thus, clients tend to view transfer programs as capricious, granting and withholding
assistance based on whims and technicalities rather than on a family’s level of need. As we will show
in Chapter V, even in cases where beneficiaries do at least partly understand the rules and methods,
they can be perceived as unfair.
One respondent reported that she got a temporary job, failed to report it to SNAP within the
required 10-day period, and was sanctioned off SNAP for a full year, even though the job had lasted
only three weeks. When we met her, she had been without SNAP for several months and was down
to just a few items of food in her cupboards. Another said that the SNAP office closed her case,
insisting that she procure a letter from a prior employer documenting the fact that she had been laid
off from her prior job. The employer proved hard to track down. During that time, she says,
“...it became difficult for us to purchase food. We would run out of food, and I had
to wait until he got paid on Friday and we would go to the supermarket and could
only spend $80 for the week, and that didn’t last long. I had to have breakfast, lunch
and dinner available for my daughter when she was off from school [for the
summer] and [for] me, because we were home the whole day. My husband only ate
dinner when he got home. So when I saw that it became more difficult for us to have
food on the table, I was motivated to really seek out my former employer to write
the letter for me to state that I no longer was employed with the company. I pretty
42 P74: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Male, Age 57, 5-person household



25

much had to beg the social worker to reopen my case and the supervisor assigned a
social worker for me and that’s when my case was reopened.”43
We heard many stories of how a recertification deadline that was missed by a day or even a
couple of hours resulted in lost benefits for a full month. Sometimes, this was allegedly an error on a
caseworker’s part: lost paperwork and caseworker mistakes were frequent complaints. We also heard
many stories about how time consuming recertification often was, and how difficult it was for
workers to take time off from their jobs to wait in line for hours at the public aid office. One
respondent who experienced this dilemma described her situation as follows:
“I was so stressed, going through a whole lot. I didn’t have time to actually go into
Public Aid and do the reinstatement for the SNAP benefits, so they cancelled it for
me for two months straight. I really, really struggled. I struggled so much, I didn’t
know what else to do. Like, emergency food was worth enough for those two
months, but I broke down through the phone. I didn’t know what else to do. She
told me, ‘It’s going to be maybe another two weeks before you get anything else,’ and
I cried.”44
One respondent describes what happened when she missed a recertification deadline right
before Christmas:
“December, Christmas season was pretty dry. It was pretty sad. We were not
working as much—I was able to pay my rent and that was it. Um, the food stamp
thing [wouldn’t] start [again] until January.... December, yeah, we were...very, very
tight. Even going out of the house [was pretty hard because] there was a lot of
people out shopping [for Christmas presents] and for a 15 year old to see that he’s
just not going to get anything was horrible, it was heartbreaking. My six year old
doesn’t really comprehend what holidays are and getting presents and quality and
brands or none of that. So, I mean, any small thing was okay. But when you just
can’t provide [nothing for a 15 year old], it’s just, it was horrible. [Finding enough
money for] food was a little bit tough that month.”45
Fifteen households experienced a financial shortfall related to food due to this cause, but no
food secure household did so, as compared to 16 percent of those with low food security and more
than a fourth (28 percent) of those with very low food security. As noted earlier, nearly all these
benefit reductions, interruptions, or losses occurred within the SNAP program. One respondent
with very low food security described a time when her SNAP benefits were cut off because of an
error that the SNAP office made, saying “My daughter and her boyfriend and their daughter all
moved in and I got discontinued because the paperwork got put in the wrong place. The supervisor
had to figure out everything.”46 It took some time for her benefits to be reinstated, and in the
meantime she struggled to provide food for her family.
43 P31: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 30, 2-person household
44 P58: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 28, 3-person household
45 P8: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 32, 3-person household
46 P64: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 43, 6-person household



26

C. Coping Strategies
SNAP beneficiaries must employ coping strategies that are both reactive—to deal with food
hardship—and proactive—to avoid it. Common reactive strategies included: restricting food intake,
altering the kinds of foods consumed, turning to networks, and visiting food pantries. But many
respondents also described a highly effective patterns of proactive coping: scouring the ads for sales,
traveling from store to store several times a month to ensure the best bargains, and planning meals
almost entirely around the sales.
Restricting Food Intake
Skipping meals is common among our respondents, so much so that some have gotten used to
it and do not even consider it a hardship. Overall, 45 percent of cases reported limiting food intake
as a strategy to stretch their food budget. However, almost two-thirds of very low food secure
households (67 percent) resorted to this, versus 32 percent for the food secure and 24 percent for
the low food secure. The following quote illustrates this point:
“(Interviewer: Tell me about the last time you or someone in your house had to skip
a meal because there wasn’t enough.)
I skip two meals a day.
(Interviewer: You’re kidding! You only eat once a day? Is that by choice because
of...?)
It’s not by choice, it’s more - I guess it was a choice at first, that it has become a
habit now and I’m used to it. So I don’t eat breakfast, and if I eat lunch I won’t eat
dinner because I’m still full.
(Interviewer: So you just got used to that.)
I got used to it.
(Interviewer: But it started because you didn't have enough?)
Exactly, because I didn’t have [enough money for food]
(Interviewer: When was that?)
When I was struggling last year for those two months. It became a habit and I got
used to it. Somehow I managed to program my own brain to not feel any hunger, I
guess - my body to not feel any type of hunger.”47
Another described a similar “habit” of skipping meals regularly:

47 P58: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 28, 3-person household



27

“Me, personally, sometimes I’ll skip meals especially on days when I go to work; then
you don’t feel it because you’re working. I’ve skipped meals. We really don’t eat at
family’s house very much. My mom, she’s still kind of struggling, and his mom lives
too far. I guess we’re just winging it, really. I guess a couple of months ago we did
[run out of food]. We actually had one pack of noodles left and then we ran out. We
really didn’t know what to do and I think that’s when his mom might have pitched in
and she got us something. It was stressful. We really didn't know what to do.”48
Many respondents’ stories emphasize that the sacrifices they are making by skipping meals are
to ensure that their children get adequate food. One respondent explains how she limits her food
intake to make sure her son has food to eat:
“I worry more about my family making sure that they have enough food. And then
I’ll get like, because we have chips, I work in the emergency room, I get like the
crackers. I’ve been living off crackers or Ramen noodles. The good thing about it is,
my doctor is very upset with me, he says my body is in starvation mode, so it’s
holding onto everything that I eat, because it doesn’t know when I’m going to eat
again. And I tell him there’s nothing I can do about that. For now this is how it is.
But I’ve actually gotten really used to eating like once a day, and then if I drink a lot
right before I eat, then I don’t eat that much and then I give my son my leftovers.”49
Another tells a similar story of prioritizing her son, and skipping meals to do so,
“Oh yeah, [SNAP] doesn’t cover a month. There is no way. It doesn’t cover a
month, not with a growing ten year old. There is no way. Half the time I don’t eat.
I’ll live on coffee and pain medication. That sounds awful but I can go without food.
I need to lose some weight anyway. That’s not the way to do it, I know, but when it
comes to [him] eating or me, it’s going to be [him] every time.”50
Changing the Type of Food Consumed
Nearly half (46 percent) of the respondents in this sample say they regularly change the type of
food they eat toward the end of the month in order to get by—generally resorting to Top Ramen,
potatoes, pasta, and other cheap starches that “stretch,” as well as canned goods. This strategy is
especially common in the very low food security group, although it is a strategy employed by
respondents in all the food security groups. Top Ramen comes up again and again in these narratives
as the fall-back when food gets tight. Many report that to get by, they “just go out and buy noodles
[Top Ramen]” which cost only pennies a pack, or draw on a reserve of ramen, canned goods, or
other non-perishables they have stockpiled in past months as insurance against food shortages. One
respondent relates how she ate cereal without the milk the last time her food budget ran dry:

48 P41: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 23, 2-person household
49 P40: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 33, 3-person household
50 P78: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 54, 2-person household



28

“During that time when I didn’t have no food, I didn’t go asking anybody. I had

plenty of peanut butter and jelly in there; I had a lot of canned goods [and non-
perishables]. I didn’t have any meats at all, no frozen food or nothing.

(Interviewer: So you just changed what you ate?)
I changed what I eat. I’m making some tuna, something I didn’t like; cereal, but
without milk, so whatever I had and I just trying to you know just do what I had to
do as far as eating. What, that was like the worst time ever, yes.”51
Another told us she knew her stock had really run low when she noted that she had only one
serving of Top Ramen left. To cope, her family ate hamburger helper “minus the meat.”
“I looked in the kitchen and there is nothing in the refrigerator, there’s like no milk
or nothing. And I’m like there’s ketchup, mustard, mayonnaise, and jelly. I’m like,
‘What the hell happened?’ And it’s nowhere near Friday [when SNAP comes in], and
the Ramen—we had one bag of Ramen left. No more hamburger, no more meat in
the freezer at all. There’s a frozen vegetable in the freezer and that was it. And so I
was just like this is going to be interesting. So I had some of the, you know like the
Hamburger Helper things, and I just made those minus the meat.”52

Some families keep a reserve of cheap non-perishables as insurance against the predictable end-
of-the-month shortfall. One such respondent colorfully explains that like a camel, a household must

keep a reserve “so you won’t die.”
“March I ran out of stamps on the 23rd. So I had a whole week, but I go to my
reserve in my pantry, all my stuff that I store. I like frozen vegetables but I will keep
canned goods. That’s when you make spaghetti. I keep stuff you can survive on,
beans and rice, I actually make those from scratch. But in a can I like Bush beans,
something like that. I keep a couple of cans of chili, for chili dogs or nachos, things
like that. That’s why a camel has a hump, for reserve. You just reserve [so] you won’t
die.”53
Another respondent describes a similar strategy:
“You know [how you deal with the end of the month?] You stock up on things that
won’t spoil and you know you’re better off because when you don’t have food
stamps, at least you have raviolis. You know or something that, you know, when you
do run out of food, at least you have something for emergencies like [what you
would need if] a hurricane comes and you’re stuck in your house for 3 days.”54

51 P54: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 44, 3-person household
52 P40: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 33, 3-person household
53 P51: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 53, 4-person household
54 P83: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 26, 2-person household



29

Networks
Kin are a vital coping strategy for households who experience a shortfall in resources for food.
The most common assistance offered is frequent invitations to meals. Toward the end of the month,
several needy households ate most of their meals at relatives’ homes. Kin might also drop by with a
couple of bags of groceries, or even offer cash, though this is less common. A casual meal
invitation—or two, or three, or more—or a surprise “visit” in which “extra” groceries are bestowed
relieves embarrassment; even needy households often try to take pride in their independence and
find the receipt of “charity” demeaning.
One respondent explained how her parents’ penchant for extending meal invitations or just
“stopping by” saves her from the embarrassment of asking for help. “My mom and dad live close
by. So, I don’t like to let them know [when I’ve run out of money for food]. But if they’re aware, if I
happen to mention something, my dad will be like, “Come on over for dinner or something!” Or
they’ll stop by [and say], “Oh, I bought some extra!” even though I know they didn’t buy extra.”55
Another told a similar story of how his family helps him out: “The beautiful thing about that is I

have family, you know what I mean? I have family. We’re a tight-knit family and her family’s a tight-
knit family.... They'll give me cash or they’ll say, ‘Well, I’m making spaghetti, why don’t you all

come over here and eat? We’re cooking out; we got the grill going on. Why don’t you all come over
and eat?’ So you know what I mean?”56
Claiming kin support is not without its costs. Some respondents report feeling considerable
shame when relatives do not “offer” help and the respondents must ask for it. One respondent put
it this way: “I go to my mom’s. I crawl back to my mom like a little baby. And I tell mom, I be like,
‘Momma, I need help.’ She’ll be like, ‘Well, I’ll see what I can do for you.’”57 Another shared the
embarrassment she experiences when she asks her mother for food,
“Oh my God. The last time [I had to beg] was probably about a month and a half
ago that I really didn’t have anything [to buy food with].
(Interviewer: And what did you do?)
I went to my mother’s house and said “Mom, I really don’t have anything to eat,”
and she gave me a bag of rice, beans, and meats for the whole week. She’s -
obviously - she tries right now to help me out a lot. It’s just hard, and it’s a little bit
embarrassing to go through that.”58
Some respondents have network resources that can be reliably drawn upon month after month.
Often, these households are drawing on kin who are better off than they are. Others’ networks are
not as reliable, often because the kin in their network are in unstable situations or in similar straits.
One respondent in the latter group told us,
55 P2: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 45, 3-person household
56 P65: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 42, 3-person household
57 P69: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 19, 2-person household
58 P57: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 42, 6-person household



30

“It’s just really like the last year and a half that I’ve been struggling a lot because my
ex-father-in-law, which is my husband’s father, used to help me out a lot.
(Interviewer: He used to help you?)
Yeah, he would bring food and stuff for the kids. But he’s been sick also, so it’s been
a while since he hasn’t been able to provide for me in the way that he used to
provide for me and the kids.”59
Some say their kin simply tire of helping, especially when implicit norms of reciprocity cannot
be met. A respondent in this situation says,
“I’ve lost a lot of friends in the last few years; people that you borrow from but you
can’t pay back.
(Interviewer: So when people - they employ other strategies. They go to friend’s
house or a relative’s house.)
I don’t have any of that [any more].” 60
Like the above respondent, a significant number of respondents specifically state that they are
bereft of network resources. One respondent describes her situation as follows:
“Really as far as relatives, since my Mom died, they just pushed me to the curb.... I
got an auntie that used to only be around the corner—she act like she hated me
when my mama died. My uncles—my mother’s brothers—they stay on the south
side. They don’t call. They know I’m sick and I got these kids, they don’t call and see
if I’m all right, if I need anything. But when my mom was living they brought my
mom food, extra food and clothes for the kids and helped her out.”61
We asked one mother, who claimed she had no network resources, “Tell me how you deal
when [food] money gets tight?” She replied, “I cry. I cry and I pray and I try to find people to beg
from. It’s like ‘Oh my God, I don’t know.’ I try to find somebody that might need me to do
something for them so they can pay me.”62 Another respondent told us about a time when she
experienced food hardship and had no one to turn to for help:
“When I completely ran out of food, I was hurting really bad.
(Interviewer: Was it a few months ago or?)
Yes.
59 P57: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 42, 6-person household
60 P12: Very Low Food Security, Other, Male, Age 57, 3-person household
61 P55: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 40, 8-person household
62 P4: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 35, 6-person household



31

(Interviewer: Okay. Can you tell me that whole story from start to finish?)
When I ran out one time I didn’t have - I don’t think I had really nothing. Water I
don’t care you can drink that and whatever but we had run out of food. I think at the
time somebody was out of town I don’t remember who it was I forgot, I was calling
around trying to get money and stuff. I had enough to feed him his hotdogs and
stuff but he had run out of that because it was only two in the pack. I was calling, I
even tried to call his father and he said he didn’t have no money and stuff so that
time I had a real tough but he didn’t go starving.... It was enough in his belly for
where he could wait until the next day....
(Interviewer: How did you cope with that?)
It’s kind of hurtful, painful to go through that knowing you have nothing and
whatever.”63
The food secure are more likely than families with lower food security—36 percent versus 24
for the low and 22 for the very low food secure—to rely on kin for shared meals, groceries, or cash
for food. But there are differences in the kind of kin assistance that families with food security
receive as well. The network resources of the food secure typically offer a regular source of food
assistance that can be relied upon each month, and the network members the food secure draw upon
are often considerably better off than they are. For example, one respondent explains how she meets
her food expenses by receiving support from both of her grandmothers. One of her grandmothers
cooks big meals and invites her over for meals regularly, and her other grandmother takes her out
for meals on a regular basis:
“Well usually like I said, my Grandma will take me somewhere to eat and then
anything I buy at the grocery store I can use food stamps. But when we go out to eat
you can’t buy food with food stamps so she will just pay for it.”64
Those in the very low food security category seldom have access to regular and reliable support.
One such respondent tells us,
“Well, there’s times I, okay, like, my grandma [who had been helping me out a lot
with food] got really sick in March and my mom had to go to Corpus Christi. So if
she’s not there we’re kind of like, what do we do, you know? So that’s when either I
go to the food bank or I’m trying to figure something out, like, ‘What?,’ you
know?”65
As is evident from the quote above, those lower in the food security hierarchy must often draw
on kin whose situations are unstable, or who are not much better off than they are even in the best
of times. Sharing food across households can ensure that when one household is in the black, they
63 P59: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 22, 3-person household
64 P36: Food Secure, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 19, 3-person household
65 P77: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 25, 2-person household



32

can help the household in the red, and everyone benefits. But when everyone in the network is
struggling, these arrangements can fall short and lead to food hardship.
Another difference to note is that food secure households are almost always on the receiving,
not the giving, end of shared meal arrangements, while a notable minority in the less food secure
categories are on the giving end, either because they have had to offer shelter and food to children,
grandchildren, or other relatives in need or because they espouse a strong norm of sharing what they
have with others who are hungry. As we have noted above, several in this group hold strong moral
or religious beliefs about the importance of sharing what resources one has with the needy. Their
networks may also be different from those of the food secure; perhaps the reason they are more
likely to give is that they have more needy network members who call on them for assistance. For
instance, one respondent explained that her uncle and his wife recently moved in with her family,
creating more difficulty in providing enough food for everyone. She explains,
“Well right now since you asked, we have a relative right now living with us. My
uncle and his wife, they're living with us right now since November of last year
because - so since then, sometimes we do struggle more than before. So we struggle
a little more but not as much - well, we do...[We] try to eat the same thing to
everybody but since sometimes right now, like my uncle - his wife is kind of a meat
eater so every time she wants to eat meat. Meat, meat, every day so if we don't have –
it’s too bad. You know, you have to eat what we have. Sometimes she's like, ‘Oh, I
don't want to eat. I don't want this. I don't want that.’ I'm sorry, we don't have any
so...”66
Food Pantries
A little more than a third (36 percent) of families use food pantries to cope with food hardship.
There were not large differences in the propensity to use food pantries by food security level.
Respondents almost uniformly view this strategy as a last resort. One common complaint is that the
food is often past its expiration date and quickly spoils, becoming unusable. Another is that the type
of items provided are sometimes not what a respondent is used to cooking with, or what the
children are willing to consume. The most common reason respondents avoid food pantries is that
they feel others are more in need, and they should leave the resources available at food pantries to
those who have nothing to eat. This sentiment, while charitable, seems to also reflect the high
degree of stigma respondents feel when they approach a food pantry for assistance.
One respondent describes her experience at a food bank, where the food was expired and
rotten, and she decided not to return after that experience:
“I used a food bank but we basically - that food bank that we went to is almost the
things that were given us, it was already expired...So it’s also the bread. The
vegetables just past. It was just -...It was like 2 years ago. I just went for a couple of
times. I didn’t go for the whole year. Just went for a couple of times since I started to
go and I seen when I got the stuff - I seen this when I get home. I had seen that this
was already expired for a week, 2 weeks before...So, yeah. I stopped going.
66 P15: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 29, 6-person household



33

(Interviewer: And how did you learn about that place? How did you learn about the
food bank? You don't remember?)
No. No, not really because the most of the banks that we have that were given us, it
was just something that we don’t know what to do because really it’s something that
they’ve given us that is not edible....It was not eatable. It was just like put it away,
don’t eat it because it’s already expired or even the vegetables. They were already -
(Interviewer: Starting to rot?)
Yeah.”67
When asked if she has ever gone to a food pantry, another respondent explains her view of
food pantries, “No because that would be greedy if I can get it other ways like from my mom. That’s
greedy. There are other people that need it.”68
One respondent shares that she does go to food pantries occasionally, but finds it embarrassing:
“A few times I’ve had to go to where they do like a church kind of thing and they. . .
(Interviewer: Like a food pantry at the church?)
Yeah, kind of like a pantry thing. Yeah. So I’ve gone there, probably two or three
times. I don’t like to.
(Interviewer: Why? Why don’t you like to?)
I don’t know...I think it’s embarrassing.”69
Careful Meal Planning
As noted in the introduction to this chapter, we looked at the food coping strategies of all
respondents, not just those who reported a financial shortfall related to food in a recent month.
When faced with a tight food budget, a highly effective proactive strategy is to engage in an
elaborate set of techniques to save money on food. While nearly everyone in this sample clips
coupons and comparison shops, these individuals shop often, and at many stores, to get the best
deals. They also carefully plan meals around sales, and make sure to stick to a grocery list and to
avoid impulse buying, even if an item is on sale. About one in five (19 percent) of households
reported this type of strategy. But whereas more than a quarter of the more food secure do so (27
percent of the food secure and 28 percent of the low food secure), only 8 percent of those who have
very low food security do so.
Many of our respondents are consummate bargain hunters when it comes to food. The most
savvy often visit three of four different stores on a regular basis to secure the best bargains, buy
67 P15: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 29, 6-person household
68 P16: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 37, 3-person household
69 P2: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 45, 3-person household



34

nothing that is not on sale, and buy in bulk when they can (if they have adequate storage space).
Here is an example of how one respondent executes this strategy with skill:
“(Interviewer: Okay, so let’s talk more about what you spend on food, starting with
April, the last 30 days. Take me through the month starting with your biggest grocery
shopping and what you spent.)
Well, since right now I am struggling, I am trying to work as much as I can with
whatever they send me. So I try to limit myself to $125 or $150 a week; which is very
little, right? I try to use every single thing. Before, we used to throw out lettuce and
peppers, you know, that stuff. Now, I try to use every single bit. My refrigerator is
empty sometimes but that’s because I’m using everything wisely. It’s because I’m
putting effort into it, you know? So I look at all the papers to see which ones have
the most sales; I make a list of the stuff that I need and want, and then just go one
day and hit the stores and buy the stuff. It’s just the stuff I have on my list. And I try
to eat before I go to the store, because if you go to the store and you’re hungry it’s
like you just need to pick up whatever.
(Interviewer: Do you ever find that you put something in your cart and then you find
yourself taking it back out later?)
I used to do that but not anymore. I used to do that a lot because I was tempted to
buy chips and cookies and stuff for the kids and I was like ‘Oh, I can’t have this; they
don’t really need this.’
(Interviewer: What’s interesting about this is you basically use the food stamps to set
up a limit. I’m not going to spend - it doesn’t sound like you spend one more penny
on food [than you have to]).
No, I can’t.”70
Another describes her shopping strategy as follows:
“(Interviewer: So how much are you getting from SNAP right now?)
$274.
(Interviewer: $274. And then do you - tell me if you pay more than that for food
each month).
No, I’m very frugal and I use coupons and I use menus. I make menus so that if I
buy a meat, I can at least use it for 2 meals and I cook it and use it for 2 meals in a
row. I buy vegetables that are on sale, you know. Usually frozen ones are on sale so
that’s what I do. I worked in the accounting department [before I lost my job.]
That’s how I do this, you know? Because it helps. My sister taught me that, the menu
70 P57: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 42, 6-person household



35

and stick to the menu and you’ll be fine. Yeah. Like I said, I look to see what’s on
sale; I plan a menu around that.”71
To stave off food hardship, particularly toward the end of the month, many devise ingenious
strategies for making food “stretch,” such as cooking large quantities of spaghetti, potatoes, or other
relatively cheap starches that can last several days or by adding vegetables or meat to Top Ramen to
make a “cheap but healthy” meal. We learned about many different “Ramen plus” recipes.
A sizeable minority—more than a quarter—of those in the more food secure groups make food
shopping a part-time job, and take considerable pride in their savings. These strategies include taking
inventory of what is in the cupboards before going shopping, making a list of what to buy at the
store and sticking to it, planning the exact meals they will make during the week or month and
purchasing the ingredients only for those meals, buying in bulk when items are on sale, searching for
sales, and going to multiple stores to get the best deals. These strategies likely reflect discipline and
skill as well as the fact that, on average, these respondents’ overall financial situations are somewhat
more stable than those with lower levels of food security. One food secure respondent explains that
she used to have trouble sticking to a budget when shopping, but has learned now to make a list and
to only buy things on that list when grocery shopping:
“Yeah. Well, I’ll take the list and this is, uh, I’ll take the list and, “Okay, I’m going to
spend $120.” And I’ll go to a store and it’s like, ‘Oh, these are on sale. I’m just going
to get these because they’re on sale’ or we need them. And the budget kind of goes
out the window. So, like, I’m better now at applying it, you know. If I go to the
supermarket with a list I stick to it. And it doesn’t matter if we don’t, we didn’t get
something that’s on the list, we’ll make do. We have to.”72
Another respondent spends a lot of time planning meals based on coupons. He gathers
coupons to see what is on sale, makes a menu based off of the coupons, and then purchases only the
food that will fill out his planned menu. He explains his shopping strategy,
“Some people buy - like me, I'll buy chicken breasts but the skinless is a little more
because they have to take the skin. Well, which is more healthy for you, you know
what I mean? So it depends on where I'm at as far as the refrigerator is concerned.
If the refrigerator is full - well, not full but you know, full of - all right, we have
chicken, we have this, we have that, so let's get something that we don't normally get,
you know, because every week, like I said, sometimes I'll buy a week's worth of
groceries, you know what I mean, and I buy dinners. I don't go in there and just buy
groceries. I say, ‘Okay, we're going to have...’
(Interviewer: Plan a menu.)
Exactly.
(Interviewer: So you go to grocery shop with a list and a bunch of coupons?)
71 P66: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 64, 2-person household
72 P17: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 33, 2-person household



36

Absolutely and you know, we can have spaghetti. I make a big pot of spaghetti.
That’s 2 days.
(Interviewer: Right. Yeah. So you know what you're doing. You really -)
You gotta make it work. You gotta make it work and I stay away from, you know -
even though it's buy one get one free with the potato chips, you know, we don't do
that.”73
Although some respondents in the very low food security group do engage in meal planning
efforts, overall the strategies of those in the very low food security group are more likely to be
haphazard, as this quote shows:
“It’s kind of spur of the moment. There is no real plan because by the time you
make a list you go in the store and half the stuff is overpriced so I’m not going to
buy it anyway.”74
D. Chapter III Summary
Unforeseen disruptions to income or benefits, or some necessary extra expenditure can upset
the delicate balance these families strike on a monthly basis to put food on the table for their
children. Families across America see ebbs and flows in their finances from month to month, but
families receiving SNAP benefits typically have far less ability to absorb the financial shock of an
illness, extra holiday expenses, a costly medical prescription, or a cutback in hours at work.
Income and government benefits are not the sole determining factor of a family’s food security;
even among the food secure, the food budget is typically very tight. Even the food secure
respondents in this study reported that they can rarely get by without deploying specific strategies to
stretch their food resources. Regularly restricting food intake toward the end of the month to get by
is common even among those families we interviewed who were food secure; generally this means
that the adults in the household must regularly skip meals. In fact, skipping meals is so common,
and many of these adults in the study, including those who are food secure by our survey measure,
have skipped meals so often and for such a long time, that it is not described as anything out of the
ordinary; in fact, it is seldom even conceived of as a hardship. Also quite striking is the fact that
those in all food security level groups in this study say that the type of food they consume changes
dramatically toward the end of the month.
Although the sample was too small to warrant making claims about differences in food
hardship and coping patterns that distinguish food secure households from low and very low food
security households, we do note several striking patterns in the data. Based on these patterns, we
venture three hypotheses in this regard.
First, much is determined by the resources that families have to draw on outside their income
and government benefits. While many families find their refrigerators growing empty toward the end
73 P65: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 42, 3-person household
74 P12: Very Low Food Security, Other, Male, Age 57, 3-person household



37

of the month, having a network of family or friends to turn to when faced with these situations
often makes the difference in being food secure. A sizeable minority of the food secure in this study
say they eat meals at the homes of family members and friends to stretch food resources, or share
responsibilities for providing groceries and engaging in meal preparation with other households.
Fully 36 percent do so, or garner groceries, or borrow cash for food from kin. In contrast, families
with very low food security often say that they have nowhere to turn when there is nothing left; they
have either exhausted their networks or lack them entirely. Some of these families regularly stretch
their resources to help others in their networks who are less fortunate.
Second, low, and especially very low food security families are more likely to be subject to
problems with SNAP recertification and abrupt drops in other government benefits, which causes
them to experience dramatic dips in their resources. Households typically carefully construct their
budgets around the expectation that they can cover most, if not all, of their food expenses with
SNAP. Thus, the loss of SNAP especially, even for a brief period of time, is almost certain to spark
food hardship.
Finally, because of a lack of time and resources, the weight of other demands, and/or poor
coping skills, households with very low food security are often less able to be proactive in preparing
for spells of food hardship in the ways more secure families do: bargain hunting, carefully planning
menus around sales, and stockpiling. The patterns in the circumstances and behaviors of very low
food security households may reflect deeper instabilities in their familial circumstances or social
networks, which may be the root cause of why they are not emulating the strategies of food secure
families.



38

IV. STRATEGIES HOUSEHOLDS USE TO MEET FOOD NEEDS
How do families acquire the food they consume each month? What preferences and constraints
guide what lands in the shopping cart and what remains on the grocer’s shelf? How do families
approach the challenge of acquiring food? When and where do they shop? How frugal are they as
food shoppers, and what strategies do they use to make their food dollars last through the end of the
month? What do these strategies require in terms of their time, emotional energy, and ingenuity?
This chapter will show that the households in this study expend their SNAP resources almost
solely for food. Only one respondent reported trading SNAP for cash or other non-food goods or
services. Most steward their SNAP resources with great care, scrimping and saving to make benefits
stretch as far as they can. Food is expensive, they say, and despite clipping coupons and visiting a
number of stores to get the very best deals they can, few can manage to make their SNAP last
through the month. Though for many households SNAP is not designed to cover all of families’
food needs75, respondents often believe it ought to do so. At the end of the month, ensuring
adequate food requires devoting a very scarce resource, cash, to food at a time in the month where
there is little or no cash to be had.
Despite past experience of lean times at months’ end, families only rarely earmark a portion of
their cash resources for food. When SNAP benefits are expended, they are often left scrambling.
Likewise, in the absence of SNAP, many families say that in order to meet other pressing financial
obligations such as rent and utilities, they cannot protect enough of their cash income from these
demands to ensure an adequate supply of food.76 This is despite the fact that nearly all of the families
in this study say they prioritize food when making financial tradeoffs. For example, a family that
suddenly loses SNAP might be willing to risk a utility shut off so they can spend more of their cash
for food, but they might be more hesitant to skip a rent payment and risk eviction.
In this chapter, we discuss where respondents do their grocery shopping, the types of food they
buy, the preferences and constraints that guide their choices, and their strategies for stretching their
food dollars. Chicken, hamburger, pork, and occasionally fish top the list of items a household feels
it must purchase each month. Many buy fresh fruit, but often choose frozen over fresh vegetables in
the absence of an especially good bargain. Almost all buy large quantities of nonperishables: staples
such as rice, pasta and beans; canned goods; and prepackaged foods and snacks. Most also purchase
a variety of juices and sodas and occasionally bottled water.
75 The value of the SNAP benefit is set each year based on the cost of the Thrifty Food Plan (TFP) for a family of
four in June of the prior year, with adjustments for household size and geographic area (if outside of the Continental
United States). SNAP benefit amounts are computed on the basis of a household’s net monthly income, the benefit
reduction rate, and the maximum SNAP benefit for its household size and location. A household’s monthly SNAP
benefit is computed by subtracting 30 percent of its net income from the maximum benefit. If a household has zero net
income (that is, its deductable expenses equal or exceed its gross income), it receives the maximum SNAP benefit. As
specified in the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008, as amended, the maximum benefit was 113.6 percent of the June 2008
TFP in fiscal year 2010 (Eslami et al. 2011). Thus, the benefit level is designed to cover all food expenditures only for
households with approximaely zero net income. In an average month in fiscal year 2010, 32.4 percent of households
with children received the maximum benefit (Eslami et al. 2011, Table A.12).
76 The exception is in late winter and early spring, when many receive substantial lump sums from refundable tax
credits such as the EITC.



39

To stretch their food dollars further, household heads scour newspapers, grocery store circulars
and internet offers, comparing prices and clipping coupons to ensure the very best deals. Many
travel to two, and often three or four, different stores to get the best bargains, and the especially
savvy may do so several times each month. Some have to travel outside their immediate
neighborhoods for the lowest prices, and must sometimes take several buses or hitch a ride with a
friend to get back and forth to each store. These strategies are routinely practiced across all food
security categories, but they are practiced to a lesser degree among the least food secure.
A. Number and Type of Stores/Frequency of Grocery Shopping
Many respondents rely on a single large chain supermarket for most of their groceries. This is
not necessarily the supermarket nearby; when possible, respondents typically eschew more expensive
local stores for retailers that can be counted upon to offer better bargains, even if they are some
distance away. Most respondents seem well informed about the merits and disadvantages of each
grocery store and food retailer in the area, including which accept SNAP. Proximity and accessibility
are nonetheless factors in deciding where to shop. One respondent said that one of the reasons she
shopped the Ralph’s Supermarket in her Los Angeles neighborhood was that it offered a shuttle, and
even a ride home if one spent more than $25.77
In addition to their main store, almost all visit additional stores offering especially steep
discounts on specific items they feel they can use. Some visit meat markets to purchase their meat,
largely because the prices are lower than at the supermarket. We asked one participant, “So each
week you wait for the flyers to come out, and then you see what is on sale, and then you go to those
stores to buy things?”
“Most of the time I purchase produce at the Korean market. Or sometimes even
some Mexican stores. Just meat I purchase the items that are on sale. For example,
fruit like this I bought two for $1.00 at Ralph’s then I found out a Korean market
had some five pieces for $1.00. So that is the way I spend money, produce I just look
at flyers. Every week different store have products on sale so I purchase the items
on sale.”78
When asked whether they shopped at the “dollar” store, many respondents replied in the
affirmative but then revealed that they usually bought only cleaning supplies and other non-food
items there. One respondent, however, provided a long list of all the fresh produce available at her
local dollar store. Others find the prices on frozen snacks, such as mini-pizzas, cheaper there.
Most respondents do the majority of their grocery shopping when their SNAP benefit arrives,
but some carefully apportion their SNAP so they can make several smaller trips. Purchases of meat,
fruit, and fresh vegetables, as well as milk and bread, require several monthly trips, while staples and
frozen goods are usually purchased at the beginning of the month. Meat and fresh produce are often
the most expensive items on the grocery lists, and respondents must often travel to several stores to
maximize savings on these items. We asked one respondent, “[You’ve talked about Jo Bees and
Kroger—specials at Kroger’s. Any other stores that you go to other than those two?” She replied,
77 P25: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 43, 4-person household
78 P24: Very Low Food Security, Other, Female, Age 57, 3-person household



40

“Wal-Mart or Family Dollar...if there is a special. If it’s on sale.... I only go to Wal-Mart for food
when it’s something on sale. Like if I see in the sales paper they have a lot of fruit, some blackberries
or something on sale and...it’s cheaper at Wal-Mart I’ll go to Wal-Mart.”79
As should be evident from the narrative above, the process of acquiring food is one that
requires considerable time and ingenuity. Because the food budget is generally tight, and the stakes
high—they feel it is imperative that their children do not go without—it can also be the source of
considerable stress.
B. Types of Foods Purchased
This section describes what goes into the grocery cart, as well as the preferences and constraints
that guide what families put in the cart or leave on the shelf. Level of food security is not strongly
associated with the types of foods that respondents purchase. Those with very low food security
shop at the same grocery stores and buy more-or-less similar products as those who are more food
secure. But as noted above, their grocery carts often contain less variety than those of households
with more food security. In contrast, the food secure are somewhat more likely than those with less
food security to indulge in items they consider “treats” when they shop (e.g., cream cheese, Craisins,
mangos, or ready-made cake).
Snacks
Respondents often place strong emphasis on the importance of purchasing snacks that their
children can consume between lunch and dinner. These comprise mostly dessert-like items such as
cookies, mini-donuts, honey buns, and snack cakes, or items such as mini-pizzas and other premade
frozen snacks. Respondents list snacks, along with more nutritious items, as a vital component of
their grocery baskets. They do so in a matter-of-fact way, perhaps indicating that they worry less
about the nutritional value of snacks than they do when it comes to what goes on the table at
mealtimes. In sum, while many think carefully about how to prepare balanced and nutritious lunches

and dinners for their children, not many are thinking about how to make their children’s between-
meal snacks healthier. One respondent, for example, said:

“I buy the jellos because they’re only a dollar for a pack of four. So I buy a lot of
those, because the baby eats them. I sent them to school for her snack, and they like
eating those. You know, it’s okay. Kids deserve snacks and I feel jello and pudding is
not that bad of a snack.”80
Several respondents, though, were careful to limit the amount of junk food in their grocery
carts. We asked all respondents, “Is there anything that you put in your cart and take out later?” One
replied, “Whenever [my daughter] sneaks in junk food. I’m not a big [one to] keep junk food in the
house...because junk food isn’t going to do anything for you except accept make you hyper and
drive you crazy, so we try to keep the junk food out of the cart.”81
79 P16: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 37, 3-person household
80 P6: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 28, 4-person household
81 P18: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 38, 4-person household



41

Pre-prepared Foods
Respondents buy large quantities and a large variety of pre-prepared foods. These include fish
sticks, chicken nuggets, and chicken fingers. A large number of respondents also buy “Lunchables”
for their children’s lunch on occasion. Hamburger Helper and Rice-A-Roni make frequent
appearances at the dinner table, as do frozen pizza, potpies, instant macaroni and cheese, and

canned soup. Frozen pizza is particularly common. As noted above, a lot of snacks are also pre-
prepared, such as frozen burritos, hot pockets, and corn dogs. Among those in this sample, Hispanic

families reported purchasing somewhat fewer pre-prepared foods for dinner than other racial/ethnic
groups.
Beverages

Respondents frequently purchase Kool-Aid Fruit, Clifford, Capri Sun, and other individual-
serving juice products, though some try to buy products that are lower in sugar or higher in

nutritional content (e.g., V8). Some respondents who also buy soda; some, but not all, acknowledge
that soda is not healthful. Families rarely serve water from the tap at home or serve water as a
beverage at meals. One respondent with very low food security said:
“We load up on juice because I hate to run out of stuff to drink. I know there is still
water but I make sure I drink water all day at work, over and over. When I’m home
and I’m eating, I want something else, so we load up on juice for the month so we
don’t run out.”82
When respondents drink water, it is usually bottled. Thus, for our respondents, then, the choice
might actually be not between free water and expensive juice, but between expensive water and
expensive juice. Perhaps respondents simply prefer a beverage with some flavor at a meal.
Fruits and Vegetables
Many respondents say their children like fruit, and make sure to pick up several different types
of fruit in the produce aisle. Fruit can be substituted for less healthy items as a snack or eaten as part
of the lunch or dinner meal. Fresh vegetable purchases are far less frequent. Respondents often say
they fear that fresh vegetables will spoil before they can be used, so they do not view such purchases
as economical unless a particularly good bargain can be had. Even then, they go to the frozen foods
aisle for the rest, or buy canned vegetables. We asked one respondent, “Is there anything that you
want to buy that you just can’t afford?”
“Probably like the fresh vegetables. We like to eat those but I usually go to the
canned good aisle and get the canned goods. They’re a little cheaper than the fresh
vegetables because they last longer than the fresh vegetables.”83
Within this sample, those with very low food security typically buy the fewest fresh vegetables
and limit themselves to basic salad components or ingredients for sandwiches, like lettuce, tomatoes,
82 P41: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 23, 2-person household
83 P14: Food Secure, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 30, 3-person household



42

and onions, and perhaps some potatoes. Some with very low food security say they are unable to
purchase any fresh produce. One such respondent said that she and her family are unable to afford
“meals”—meaning balanced lunches and dinners—because fruit and vegetables are entirely out of
her price range. We asked, “Is there anything that you want to buy that you just can’t afford, in the
grocery store?”
“...we’re thankful for the $200 [from SNAP] but it just doesn’t seem like
enough...to have a meal every day. If we did try a meal for every day, or try to cook
[all three meals—], breakfast, lunch, dinner—it wouldn’t be enough money. And to
get fruits and stuff that we should be getting, especially for my daughter, and salad
and all that stuff, that stuff is too expensive; we can’t even look at it....
(Interviewer: And the fruits and vegetables at Joe V’s [discount grocery story], are
they affordable or no?)
They’re a little cheaper but apples are still expensive. We would have to put [other]
food back to get fruits and vegetables. Then we would run out of food. So we don’t
even look that way; we don’t get them even though we should be getting them.
(Interviewer: It’s a problem when produce is more expensive than other things.)
Really, the healthier food period is more expensive. The stuff that we should get that
is good for us, we probably can’t get it.”84
C. Approaches to Grocery Shopping
We asked respondents how they decided what to buy and what not to buy when grocery
shopping. Price is their primary consideration. Nutrition, while a concern, often takes a distant
second place. Many in the very low food security category explicitly said they could not afford to eat
healthfully. One respondent, when asked how she decided what to buy or what not to buy, said,
“Depending on price usually, yeah, price is such a big factor. If I’m getting [only] this
much for $6.00 is it really worth it? Is this going to feed everybody or should I look
for something a little cheaper, a little bigger? Price has a lot to do with it. Price and
[then] quantity.”85
Many respondents plan meals and create detailed meal plans and shopping lists before visiting a
store, deciding where to buy what after researching newspaper ads and circulars for sales. One keeps
a mental list of the food groups in her head and scours store circulars to find a deal for items in each
group. We asked her, “How do you decide where you're going to go on your shopping trips? What’s
your method on deciding?”
“I figure out what I want to eat for that week—really two weeks at a time. [In my]
meal planning I’ll...decide, well, I’m going to be eating a lot of rice, regular rice, so
84 P41: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 23, 2-person household
85 P18: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 38, 4-person household



43

BJ’s has the best price on rice so I’ll go buy the rice there and I’m going to get their
potatoes because they have the 20lb bags versus the 5lb bags. So basically it revolves
around meal planning.
(Interviewer: That makes sense.)
And then from there I’ll decide, ‘Okay, who has sales on meat?’ and so on and so
forth and that’s how I’ll do it.”86
A careful accounting of what remains in the cupboard—what items have been expended or are
running low—lays the groundwork for grocery list preparation. One respondent explains, “I always
check my cupboards to see what I need and what I don’t need and done. I always check before I go
because I don’t buy anything that’s unnecessary.”87
Households may shop for groceries every week, or even several times a week, so they can take
advantage of discounts within the time frames for which they are available. Shopping frequently to
capitalize fully on sales incurs additional transportation costs and takes time, but these shoppers
believe the savings outweighs these costs. One told us,
“I wait till the sales come out which is usually on Wednesday or Tuesday and on the
following day I will find out what is on sale. If chicken breast is on sale and they are
on sale for $1.29 then I will get the limit and even go back the next day and get
[more]. I get it, separate it, freeze it and so we have several nights. If [it’s] pork
shoulder they have...on sale..., if you get a double pack it is $12.00, but it is
two...meals [in] each [pack]. You can make burritos or whatever with it one day and
then put it over rice [the next]. So that is how I shop by the sales ads, strictly by the
sales ads.”88
Some respondents carry a calculator with them during shopping trips, or use the calculator
feature on their cell phones to tally their bill as they shop. Others keep a mental running tally.
Despite their best efforts to plan meals and keep within a budget, they must often return items to
the shelves or set them aside at checkout. Some respondents place items on the conveyor belt in
order of necessity and then watch the tally. This way, they can simply leave any items they cannot
afford in the grocery cart rather than having to make that determination after their SNAP card has
already been declined. Having one’s card declined is repeatedly cited as a source of great
embarrassment. One respondent described how she felt the last time this happened.
“It is awful embarrassing getting up there and then the card is denied. When they
deny it they go, ‘Mister, your card is denied!’ as loud as they can. Last time the lady
did that I looked right at her and said, ‘Can you say it any louder?’ So she pushed the
button for the manager to come over and he says, ‘What’s the problem?’ I said ‘Well,

86 P7: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 41, 4-person household
87 P32: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 24, 4-person household
88 P1: Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 47, 3-person household



44

my card doesn’t cover it so I can’t buy all of it and your teller has a loud mouth.’ And
then I asked the manager if he could please help me sort it out. He did.”89
The majority of respondents say they must sacrifice quality in order to purchase enough food to
get through the month. One follows specific rules with regard to what cuts of meat he allows
himself to buy. We asked him, “So in general, how do you decide what to buy and what not to buy?”
“Prices, and you know meat, chicken, I can’t buy breasts, only legs and thighs,” he tells us.90
Several respondents say that they save on food costs by cooking the same meals each week, and
do not add any ingredients that are not strictly necessary, sometimes sacrificing flavor. Shoppers
who deploy this strategy rarely try anything new. We asked whether there was anything she wanted
to buy that she just couldn’t afford, and one respondent said,
“Uh, just extra ingredients. Sometimes that you think that you might want to try
something different and we just know we can’t get it because you need so many
ingredients for one meal that it’s just no point. Just cook what you know and that’s
it.
(Interviewer: Yeah. That’s tough. I do that, too. I want to - yeah, you have a special
spice or something-)
Right.... It’s like, really if I get that spice then I need this spice and... Yeah. I’ll just
stick to what I know and it’s very generic.”91
This quote illustrates just how closely most respondents stick to their grocery lists, and how
little flexibility they have. Most stick to a strict budget as well. We asked one respondent, “Let’s say
that we are at Market Basket, [where you said you do your big grocery shopping trip], and you have
your cart - where will we go first?”
“First I go to the aisle where the dairy [is, and buy] mozzarella cheese, orange juice,
1% low-fat milk. I walk up to the eggs and I grab a dozen or a dozen and a
half...and then I go to the dry food aisle and get corn meal, sugar, cooking oil, rice,
canned beans to cook pupusas, dried beans for me, chocolate, a can of coffee for the
month. Then I walk over to the meat section and get a can of meat, one or two
chickens, one or two packages of wings and thighs, liver, chicken gizzards.
Sometimes I get fish—salmon, tilapia—one or two [and] depending on the price...,
a package of pork meat. After that I go to the vegetable section and get lettuce,
tomatoes, green chili peppers, radishes, pearl onions, beef bones to make soup,
cassava, green plantains. I then approach the bread aisle and get the sliced bread,
and...then I approach the frozen section and I get green tamales, vegetables for the
rice, and sometimes I’m able to get a bag of French fries, lollipops, ice cream for
[family member]. If I’m in the mood to make tamales, I get the leaf to make tamales,
water, soda, juices. Sometimes when I’m unable to get the soda or juices, I get two
89 P12: Very Low Food Security, Other, Male, Age 57, 3-person household
90 P9: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 37, 6-person household
91 P8: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 32, 3-person household



45

cans of Kool-Aid in different flavors - that’s about it. And then I reach the register
and I pay $190, $194; sometimes it comes to exactly the $200.
(Interviewer: So you already know how to shop by heart?)
Yes, I already have my shopping down pat. I don’t even pass through certain
sections because I won’t be able to get anything in those aisles.”92
Food secure respondents sometimes have some measure of flexibility in their grocery budget.
We asked, “So is there anything when you go shopping that you like to buy but you don’t buy?”
“Absolutely. Like Cool Whip. Who wouldn’t want to have lobsters or who wouldn’t
want to have some kind of salmon, you know what I mean? Every now and again,
depending on what’s in the refrigerator, you know—I don’t buy lobsters, you know
what I mean—but I might buy some salami..., I might buy some salmon or
something, you know, as opposed to the filets, the frozen filet, cod filet things, you
know? If, depending on how the month went..., if I can afford to do that, I’ll do
that.”93
Respondents typically allow health and nutrition concerns to influence their food purchasing
only when they feel they can afford to. That said, respondents who have some flexibility with
grocery shopping funds are sometimes willing to spend a little extra for healthy food. When we
asked one respondent whether she buys juice on a regular basis, she replied, “Yes, we do do some
juices, yes. Usually the V8.... That’s usually an expense I’m willing to incur, because I try to get the
V8 that has a little bit less sugar and a little bit more nutritional value.”94
Another tells us,
“...I buy some expensive items but it’s mostly for the health benefit. That’s the way
I look at it I’m okay with buying food that’s more expensive than you might find as
long as it has the added health value for it. I’ll buy organic milk which is $6.50
instead of $3.50 a gallon because for me I think that’s worth it because I just want to
make sure that I’m feeding the kids the healthiest food possible. That’s my priority
so even if we eat a little bit less food, which we don’t just in general, we don’t have
big appetites anyways so we don’t just over eat, we don’t eat tons but we...try to eat
healthy and rich food. So it’s satisfying and we’re not feeling hungry afterwards but
we’re also not eating huge amounts of food. We just want to make sure that we’re
eating enough that we’re staying healthy.”95

92 P31: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 30, 2-person household
93 P65: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 42, 3-person household
94 P43: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 54, 2-person household
95 P63: Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 28, 3-person household



46

D. Chapter IV Summary
SNAP participants are often highly cognizant of how to maximize their benefit each month,

and seek a balance between nutrition and variety versus quantity and price. Many have well-
developed strategies. Some employ quite elaborate routines to ensure they are getting the best deals

on food. Typically this requires shopping at a number of different stores and planning their menu
carefully to take full advantage of what is on sale at a particular time. This strategy is the least
common among the very low food secure.
While many buy prepared foods, snacks with little nutritional value, and soda or sugary juices,
there is a common perception that healthier foods, especially fresh vegetables, are too expensive.
Thus, most participants focus on purchasing food that will satisfy their children’s desires as cheaply
as possible, while explicitly noting that this is not what they would choose if their main goal was to
provide a well-balanced diet. This compromise is made to ensure that their SNAP benefits will
stretch through as much of the month as possible. Often, a limited food budget requires a diet of
little variety and low quality; parents see the key tradeoff as nutrition versus hunger.

This page has been left blank for double-sided copying.



48

V. EATING AND FOOD DYNAMICS WITHIN THE HOUSEHOLD
In the previous chapter, we described how families procured food. Here the focus is on the
food they consume. What constitutes a typical breakfast, lunch, and dinner? What about snacks?
Does the weekday routine vary on weekends? SNAP aims to put healthy foods into the hands of
economically needy households. We ask what SNAP households think unhealthy eating entails, and
what respondents think their most unhealthy habits are. We then move to food consumed outside
the household. When is food shared across households, when is it not, and why? When do families
eat out and why, and what types of venues do they frequent? What health challenges do SNAP
households face, and how do these challenges affect their diets? If these families had unlimited food
budgets, what types of food do they say they would buy?
Most parents strive to provide healthy food for their families, but patterns of food consumption
at lunch, and especially at snack time, are often unhealthy. In fact, parents seem to view snack time
as unhealthy almost by definition, and insist on having a reserve of frozen mini-pizzas or sugary
snacks on hand in the afternoons. Being able to provide such treats, in fact, seems central to their
identities as parents. Yet at mealtime, having children in the home seems to boost parents’
commitment to well-balanced meals; when children are away, meals are less carefully planned and
less well-balanced. Serious health problems are common among both adults and children and
sometimes require special diets, but they are rarely cited as a reason to keep one’s diet healthy.
Despite tight budgets, most families do eat out from time to time, or order takeout, for a variety
of reasons—to celebrate a special occasion, or because they are pressed for time, for example.
Losing SNAP seems to prompt visits to fast-food restaurants, because it is hard to marshal enough

cash to conduct a major grocery store run and purchase the numerous items needed for a well-
balanced meal. About one in five families routinely eat at the household of family members and

friends; most do so at least on occasion. In the prior chapter, we showed that this is a crucial
strategy for coping with food hardship, one disproportionately available to the food secure. But our
respondents seldom reciprocate, and in fact usually refuse to do so: “I won’t feed other people at my
kids’ expense,” one mother said,96 unless the visitors are children themselves—nieces or nephews or
their children’s friends. Most hold to the “no entertaining” rule quite fiercely: even on holidays,
several respondents sat at home rather than open their doors to family and friends; they simply
could not afford to. But on their children’s birthdays, they do entertain, often saving for weeks or
even months to provide food for the event.
Most households define a healthy diet as one rich in fresh fruits and vegetables, and strive to
provide a “real meal”—a vegetable, a starch, and a source of protein—for dinner each night. They
named greasy fried food and sugary juices and snacks as the most dangerous culprits in an unhealthy
diet. But families consumed a host of such unhealthy items each month, sometimes laying the blame
on cultural practices, a child who was a picky eater, or even the desire to offer an occasional trip for
ice cream to make their children feel like “ordinary kids.” Usually though, good intentions with
regard to nutrition were defeated by a single factor: cost. Most claimed it was simply cheaper to eat
poorly than to eat well. Notably, pre-prepared foods were seldom identified as unhealthy.

96 P12: Very Low Food Security, Other, Male, Age 57, 3-person household



49

A. Meals and Snacks at Home
Breakfast is typically a lighter meal during the week than it is over the weekend. Lunch is almost
always a simple meal, composed most often of “instant” or ready-to-eat foods, fast food, or
leftovers. Dinner is the largest meal of the day—it is usually a balanced meal of meat, starch, and
vegetables.
Breakfast
Some adults do not eat any breakfast on weekdays, some eat only cereal, and some eat a full
breakfast (bacon and eggs, etc.). Children typically eat breakfast at home; fewer in this sample than
expected eat a reduced-price or free breakfast in school (even if they are eligible for it). Cereals vary
in nutritional content. They include oatmeal, grits, and sugary cereals like Cocoa Krispies.
On weekends, most respondents eat large breakfasts often composed of eggs and/or pancakes,
breakfast meats, and some kind of cereal (usually oatmeal and grits).
Lunch
There is little consistency in what respondents eat for lunch on weekdays. Children typically eat
at school or daycare. Adults generally eat leftovers, make something that is quick and easy to prepare
(such as instant macaroni or Oodles of Noodles instant soup), or spring for a cheap fast-food meal.
We asked one respondent, “...when you eat at work, is that food that you’re bringing or buying?”
She replied, “That’s food that I take. I either take leftovers from the night before or I buy the cups
of microwavable macaroni. That’s what I’ve been living off of [for lunch] for the last three
months.”97
On weekends, lunch is again a light meal of something easy to prepare. Several respondents eat
lunch at church on Sundays.
Snacks
As noted in the prior chapter, nearly all respondents provide their children an afternoon snack
between lunch and dinner. One explained: “They eat...their breakfast and lunches [at school]. As
soon as they come in they’re practically starving so [I] fix them a sandwich, [or they eat] a
Lunchable, a piece fruit, or something. Then I cook about five o’clock. They eat dinner.”98
Dinner
Dinner is the biggest and most important meal of the day for nearly all respondents, both on
weekdays and on weekends. Nearly all have some sort of meat or fish for dinner, though since these
are expensive items, ensuring a source of protein is not always possible toward the end of the
“month” (the SNAP benefit period). Typically, there is some starch in the meal, usually potatoes or
rice. Most also say they make sure to have a vegetable dish (or salad) with the evening meal. As
noted in Chapter III, families rely on frozen vegetables more often than fresh, because fresh
97 P44: Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 32, 5-person household
98 P16: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 37, 3-person household



50

vegetables spoil too quickly, leading to waste. One respondent explained her dinner planning routine
as follows:
“Dinner is fish and chicken, or we eat - my gosh, he just eats very healthy, he eats a
lot of fresh vegetable or frozen vegetables are usually what I purchase. And so a
typical meal is usually three courses; it’s usually a meat, a vegetable and typically a
starch. I went to Costco and I have a huge bag of pinto beans. Thank goodness that
we really like those, and so I make chili with those, I make baked beans with those.
You know, I’ve gotten really creative.”99
Meal Patterns by Food Security Level
Those with very low food security generally eat less-balanced meals, especially at dinner. They
are more likely to eat only starches—pasta, ramen noodles, or potatoes—for dinner, particularly
toward the end of the month. Heavy reliance on inexpensive starches was a common coping
mechanism among households lower in food security.
Some household heads in the very low food security category actively choose to eat only two
meals a day because of limited funds, though there are parents in all food security groups who
regularly skip meals. Many respondents said they skip meals because they simply cannot afford to eat
three meals a day. One respondent explained, “If we eat breakfast, we don’t have lunch. If we don’t
have lunch, yeah, vice versa, because we don’t, we don’t eat three meals a day. We only eat two.”100
Another said, “And on Saturday...I didn’t have any breakfast. You really have to be careful because
you have to make this money last a whole month. So you really have to be careful. Sometimes you
have to eat a little less just to make sure you get through the month.”101
Children and How They Affect Meal Patterns
Meal patterns change when the children in the household are away. This can happen during
school vacations when children are spending time with relatives. It can also be true for respondents
who share custody of children with former spouses or partners. Their meals become smaller, more
basic, and less balanced when their children are not present. Some parents told us they skip meals
altogether when their children are not at home. We asked one respondent, “So what’s a typical
weekend a typical Saturday or Sunday?” She told us,
“Well they’re actually with their father during the afternoon [on those days] so
usually we’ll have a breakfast like I said sometimes we’ll eat some types of whole
grains for breakfast like the oatmeal or quinoa or something.... I’ll just kind of get
anything to eat—some small meal—to eat for lunch and dinner....”102

99 P43: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 54, 2-person household
100 P8: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 32, 3-person household
101 P70: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 54, 2-person household
102 P63: Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 28, 3-person household



51
Health Issues and How They Affect Meal Patterns
Diabetes, asthma, and food allergies are the most commonly cited health issues our respondents
face. They suffer from a variety of food allergies as well, including allergies to dairy, nuts, corn,
seafood, eggs, citric acid, chili peppers, and grapefruit. The majority of these allergies did not appear
to have been formally diagnosed. However, many respondents gave concrete examples of the kinds
of physical reactions they (or their family members) suffered after eating these foods. Both adults
and children suffered from food allergies. With a few exceptions, those who required special diets,
or had household members who did, made some changes to their diet. Many though had
considerable trouble making all the adjustments they felt they needed to, in part because purchasing
for more than one kind of diet was expensive. For example, we asked one respondent with diabetes
“Does the fact that you have diabetes affect the way you have to shop for food?”
“I buy [most of what I buy] because of the kids. [But] then I can’t cook [the] food [I
need]. I haven’t learned how to make mine separate from everybody else because it’s
so many against one. So I try to eat a little less. [The] only time I eat a lot [now] is
when I’m mad or I can’t resolve a problem that’s going on. I solve the problem then
I just [go back to just eating less], like before.”103
B. Eating Out/Ordering Takeout
Respondents usually spend between $20 and $100 each month on eating out or (much less
commonly) ordering takeout. While a few respondents say they never eat out, most report doing so
roughly once a week, usually at a fast-food restaurant like McDonald’s, Taco Bell, or Subway. The
McDonald’s $1 menu is a particular draw. Those who are food secure occasionally eat out at slightly
more expensive restaurants like Applebee’s, T.G.I. Friday’s, or Olive Garden, though for most,
eating at such places is a rare treat rather than a common occurrence.
Respondents usually eat out either to save time when they are pressed for it, to offer a child a
treat, to get a change of scenery, or to celebrate a special accomplishment. But loss of SNAP can
also trigger trips for fast food.
One respondent described the most recent time her family ate out: “We just went out this past
weekend because my daughter, she got her progress report, so she’s doing good in school. She
wanted to go to Olive Garden. That’s where we took her.”104 Another told us,
“My daughter loves to go to IHOP because she likes pancakes and I don’t make
pancakes at home. [E]very other Friday—like when I work the weekends I’m off that
Friday so my Fridays off—I keep her home [from daycare] with me. So we’ll go to
IHOP.... She’ll say, ‘Mommy, do you have money today? Can we go for pancakes?’
[It’s] not that expensive. Even if I can’t eat for myself but I try to treat her, you know
what I mean? Because I know she looks forward to it. So I always take her, find a
way to $5 or $10 to pay for that.
103 P55: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 40, 8-person household
104 P20: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 23, 4-person household



52

(Interviewer: Yeah. They give you such giant pancakes and you can probably split it.)
Usually. I mean, I don't ever go out to eat myself to be honest with you but even if I
couldn’t [take her, I would feel bad]. Like I would make sure that she [gets to go]
because she looks forward to it, you know?”105
Some respondents say they go out to eat just for a change. “I believe you have to go out once in
awhile. You can’t be cooped up in the house all the time. Even if it hurts a little you just got to get
up and go,” one man told us.106 Another explained,
“We try to go out at least - I have my daughter every other weekend so I’ll try to go
out at least once a month, you know what I mean...?
(Interviewer: That's nice.)
I like that she’s four. I like to take her out now and get her experienced so that by the
time she’s 10 and 12, when she goes out...she knows how to act and conduct herself
when she’s out, you know what I mean? And more importantly, why not? You know
what I mean? Why not work hard, you know what I mean [so you can do something
special with your kids]? I do my carpentry stuff, you know, and I sacrifice my body
for my money so I can afford to take my kids out to a Friday’s or something or
Applebee’s, ‘Two for $20,’ you know what I mean?”107
Workers who are especially fatigued or pressed for time sometimes spring for a fast-food meal
rather than cook. We asked one respondent, “...on top of [your SNAP] do you spend anything else
on food?” She replied, “Yeah, because sometimes we run out or if I’m on the way to work or
something and I haven’t eaten then I’ll have to stop and get something. But it’s only like $10
probably a week because I’ll go and get something off the $0.99 menu just to hold me.”108 Another
said, “When I’m exhausted in the week and I just cannot look at the kitchen so it’s like I’ll buy
[carry-out].”109
Losing SNAP benefits can also trigger fast-food meals, especially for those who cannot reserve
enough cash from their regular income to undertake a major grocery-shopping trip or buy all the
ingredients for a balanced meal. One respondent told us that the $1 menu at McDonald’s was the
cheapest way to provide a meal that had “all the different food groups.” A McDonald’s hamburger,
she pointed out, contains bread, meat, cheese, and lettuce. Preparing a meal with that much variety
at home, she said, would cost her much more.

105 P81: Low Food Security, Other, Female, Age 29, 2-person household
106 P73: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 38, 3-person household
107 P65: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 42, 3-person household
108 P41: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 23, 2-person household
109 P30: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 29, 2-person household



53

C. Food Sharing Across Families and Households
Our respondents routinely share food with family members both within and outside their
households. Typically, those with access to more resources or those with SNAP benefits help out
family members who are struggling financially or lack SNAP benefits. In multigenerational
households, it is typically the older members who provide for the younger. Usually, the families we
interviewed are on the receiving end of food-sharing arrangements, but those who are on the giving
end often find it challenging to provide the assistance they do offer, as we discussed in Chapter III.
When doubled up, Black Non-Hispanic households in our respondent group almost always
share grocery and cooking duties across subfamilies, whereas subfamilies of other racial/ethnic
groups are more likely to keep their food separate. When grocery shopping, most Black respondents
whose families live with other families or individuals usually say they operate on the assumption that
they are buying for everyone when they shop. Feeding the family is considered a joint effort, with
the women putting their heads together to figure out how to feed everyone in the household. Even
when Black subfamilies do buy just for themselves, it is often with the understanding that other
subfamilies in the household may draw on these groceries if need be.
One Black mother lives in a household of 12, including her children, several of her siblings, her
mother, and her grandmother. Together, they draw on a variety of resources to pay bills and buy
food. At present, these include cash out of pocket, the respondent’s SNAP benefits, her sister’s
disability check, and a small payout from a life insurance policy. Two members of the household, her
mother and grandmother, have steady jobs, but the respondent and her sister do not; they braid hair
or give plasma to close the gap when money for food is running short. She tells us,
“We pull together. My grandma, she spends out of her pocket to get food and my
mom will spend out of her pocket to go get food. Me, I spend out of my pocket [or
use SNAP] to go get food and we’ll be like “Oh, what are we going to eat today?”
We’ll come home with it and then if we completely don’t have money, me and my
sister will go give plasma so we have money to get food.
(Interviewer: Okay, so is it like on a daily basis that you guys have these
conversations?)
Yeah.
(Interviewer: Okay, so there isn’t just one big grocery-shopping trip.)
No, it’s like every day we have to find something because we don’t have...enough
money [to buy everything at once]. We are paying bills [so] we just don’t have
enough money to just go grocery shopping because it’s a lot of people that stay here
[and the bills can run high].”110
Subfamilies in other racial/ethnic groups usually shop for groceries and cook separately. In a
number of cases, individual families stored their food in their bedrooms. One multigenerational
110 P48: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 19, 6-person household



54

household even had refrigerators in each bedroom for food storage.111 But keeping food separate
can be difficult when children are involved. We asked one Hispanic respondent, who was doubled
up with her sisters, whether they shared food. She said, “I have my own groceries..., they have their
own groceries. But sometimes my nephew, [it’s] after school and he’s just like, ‘Can I get this?’ or
‘Can I get this?’ And I can’t say no, you know?”112
Sharing Food Outside the Household
Many respondents eat meals at the homes of relatives several times each week. However, our
respondents almost never invite relatives or friends to their home for a meal. We asked one
respondent, “Okay..., if people are stopping by, or relatives come over, that kind of gets tighter, not
for you?” She replied, “That’s not happening. We’ll come to you but absolutely not! Are you kidding
me?”113
Respondents may sometimes make an exception for their children’s friends, who may stop by
frequently, sometimes several at once. Teenage boys in particular can eat their way through a
household’s food reserve quickly. Many respondents face this situation with equanimity, because
their children’s friends are “just kids” and thus should not be denied. When these children come by,
respondents try to provide food items that are cheap and that “stretch” such as garlic bread or
potatoes. What follows is an example of a respondent who refuses to entertain her own friends in
her home, but cannot say no to her children’s friends.
“I don’t allow [my] friends to just drop in like that. If they do they bring their own
provisions. I won’t short my kids for other people.
(Interviewer: What about your son’s friends? Do they ever come by and...?)
Oh they come by; they know enough to bring a sandwich (laughter, which makes it
clear she is teasing). No, I’ll pull a fish out of the freezer. My son’s got two or three
friends; I’ll fry up some fish. That’s one thing I can say, my kids’ friends all love my
cooking.
(Interviewer: Does it put a strain on you though to have a few more mouths to
feed?)
It does but I’m old-fashioned; I cannot not do it. I can’t have 5 pieces of fish when
there are seven kids there. I just can’t do it; it would break my heart to have to do
that.”114
Some, though, are less tolerant of the situation. A few are reduced to hiding food before their
children’s friends arrive, telling them point blank that they cannot afford to fix them a snack, or
asking the parents of these children to pay for that food. One tells us,
111 P61: Very Low Food Security, Other, Male, Age 22, 5-person household
112 P28: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 27, 3-person household
113 P43: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 54, 2-person household
114 P12: Very Low Food Security, Other, Male, Age 57, 3-person household



55

“Oh my God. I have kids, and kids bring friends and I feel so bad because
sometimes I don’t have it and I can’t offer it. But it’s just like, when it’s there I can’t
just hide the food. I feel so embarrassed sometimes and I tell the kids - I try to tell
them, the kids - “We don’t have much food, you have to understand.” But you know
they’re kids; they don’t understand. They bring everyone over and it’s like “Come on,
let’s eat.”
(Interviewer: So what do you do?)
Sometimes I have to give it up. And a lot of times I know [they are coming and] I
hide it before they get there. And then I say, “Oh, your friends have to go, you have
to come and eat,” and then sit them down and they eat, and then I say, “Okay, you
can go out now.” But sometimes they catch me off guard, like get there before I put
the food away. That’s part of life.”115
Another respondent relates the following story:
“Once my daughter had a friend stay a few days and yes, she consumed a lot of
[food], so I had no other choice but to ask the lady not to bring the child anymore
because it was getting out of hand. My daughter is not a big eater—she will consume
a fruit or juice, but it’s not in a large abundance like this little girl. [The girl] would
ask me to cook, and I cooked and she asked for more servings. And then she would
open the refrigerator and help herself without asking permission. I don’t know if this
child was fed at home....
She would come directly from school.... When her mom came to pick her up, I
spoke to her and I told her that I didn’t think that [the girl] ate so much. I told her
that if [her daughter] asked for a juice, [the girl] asked for two; if I served some food
she would ask for another serving. [I told her,] “I’m sorry, but you are going to have
to give me some money so that I could replenish some of the items she consumed.”
I told her that I could barely make it to feed my daughter and was not able to feed
more.”116
Special Occasions
There is one other exception to the no-entertaining rule many respondents follow: most feel it
imperative to invite the extended family over and provide cake, ice cream, and other treats for their
children’s birthday celebrations or graduations. Many purchase and prepare the food for these
celebrations themselves, while others ask relatives to contribute to a potluck-style meal.
On holidays, however, families feel no such imperative, and only rarely host celebrations. A
surprising number of respondents simply spend holidays by themselves, citing their inability to
afford entertaining. Some attend charity dinners at churches and other community venues. But many
attend large gatherings with extended family, especially for Thanksgiving and Christmas. In these
115 P57: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 42, 6-person household
116 P31: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 30, 2-person household



56

cases, respondents typically contribute one dish to the meal, often because their relatives understand
their economic constraints. One explains, “Usually we all go to my aunt’s house [for special
occasions]. They know me they know my situation, so they just tell me to bring mashed potatoes
and then there’s the meal.”117
When respondents do entertain, some rely on credit cards to fund the additional expenses.
Most in this sample, however, use their SNAP and skimp on food for the rest of the month. One
woman even saved a portion of her SNAP benefits for six months in order to celebrate her
daughter’s birthday in style:
“Well for my daughter’s birthday...I had to buy all the food because it’s my
daughter. But I knew [I had to begin to prepare in] January because my daughter’s
birthday’s in July. So since January I kept saving out of my food stamps—$50, $50,
$50, $50.... I mean, like I said, I just saved and like I said—budget, budget, budget,
budget.... I was going to have a cookout for my daughter so I knew this in January
and decided [to start saving]. Because when you have no money, you gotta think
months ahead and save for that one occasion, even if it’s $20 a month.”118
D. Health and Food
We asked each respondent to describe what “healthy eating” means to them, what their
unhealthiest food habits are, what they would purchase that they do not purchase now if their funds
were unlimited, and how they accommodate their children’s food preferences. For most, healthy
eating means fresh fruits and vegetables. Most named greasy or high-sugar foods as the unhealthiest
components of their diet. Many said they would purchase healthier foods if they had more money to
spend, but eating healthy simply costs more. Some households had children who were picky eaters.
Such children consumed less nutritious food than households with children who ate whatever they
were given.
Healthy Eating
Respondents generally claimed that at least at dinnertime, their families ate balanced meals.
Many provided concrete examples of the balanced meals they planned and served at dinner. They
were also quite forthcoming about unhealthy eating habits.
When asked what, in their view, constituted a healthy diet, respondents almost always cited
fruits and vegetables as key. Several also noted the importance of drinking a lot of water (which
typically meant bottled water). Most thought it was essential that all food groups be represented in
one’s diet, and at the dinner meal. Some mentioned the importance of “portion control.”
In an effort to reduce consumption of fat, a few respondents bake their meats instead of frying
them. One woman even talked at length about the importance of using “good oil” (e.g., olive oil).
Opinions varied about juices and their nutritional value. Many felt that juices were full of sugar and
117 P40: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 33, 3-person household
118 P83: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 26, 2-person household



57

should be limited or avoided. Some respondents did include juice in their list of “healthy foods” and
elected to buy juice instead of soda.
Many households defined healthy eating as consuming a protein, a starch, and a vegetable at
dinner. We asked one respondent, “Do you wish that they had more healthy food or do you think
they’re pretty good on that?” She told us,
“They’re pretty good on that because that’s what’s on the plate. I mean, you’re
hungry and you’re going to eat what’s on the plate and what’s on the plate is always a
meat, some kind of rice or pasta, and a vegetable. Always. That’s always on there.
(Interviewer: Yeah, I noticed that when you were talking earlier; you had three slots
you were filling with every meal.)
Yeah. Always. Always, always, always.”119
Unhealthiest Food Habits
Fried or greasy food, high-sugar foods (candy, cookies, and other dessert), chips and other
snacks, and soda were identified as the least healthy foods in respondents’ diets. Some respondents
tied unhealthy eating habits to ethnic traditions. Hispanic respondents often noted that they were
raised eating meals consisting of rice, beans and meat, and fried foods.120 Many said it was a struggle
to change those habits now by replacing starches with healthier foods like salads. One told us,
“It’s probably...cultural, you’re used to certain things. We eat fried chicken, fried
pork, no salad, plantains, everything deep fried. It’s more of what you’re used to,
what you’re accustomed to than anything else. So to try to tell me that salads...and
fruits are much better for you than my fried chicken! It’s like, it’s hard. I mean, I
know much more better now since I’m here, you know. So, it’s hard to kind of break
the routine. It is. Um, yeah.
(Interviewer: No, I completely get that. I mean, my husband and I just love potatoes.
And all we want to do is fry potatoes....)
I mean, it’s the same thing. Even with your kids. You try to not bring them up the
way you were brought up but it’s hard. She already doesn’t eat certain vegetables and
I try to eat more of them to show her to eat them.”121

119 P65: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 42, 3-person household
120 Only five respondents mentioned food practices unique to their culture/ethnicity. Cultural practices could affect
either patterns of purchasing or types of foods consumed. For example, some Hispanic respondents in Texas mentioned
that they purchased meat only at La Michoacana, a Mexican meat market chain. A Libyan respondent said she purchased
meal from a Halal market, and a respondent of Indian origin shopped for groceries at an Indian market. Other
respondents shopped at “ethnic” stores on occasion as well, but because of lower prices, not cultural practices.
121 P17: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 33, 2-person household



58

How Children’s Tastes Shape Healthy and Unhealthy Eating
Many respondents claimed their children were picky eaters. We said to one, “...some parents
tell us that they want their children to eat healthier but the children don’t want to.” She responded,
“That’s why I want to [make my daughter eat healthy] now because she’s little.
Because later when she’s older it will be the same as with me—now that I’m older I
don’t like to eat vegetables.
(Interviewer: And what was I going to say - and any time have you tried to give her
something healthier and she has refused it?)
Yes.... She didn’t eat it. She spits it out....
(Interviewer: What food was it?)
I tried giving her carrots because at WIC they told me to try and give the vegetables
by hand. She does like broccoli a little bit, but [only] broccoli in Chinese food.”122
However, a surprising number of respondents also said their children had large appetites and
ate any dish that was put before them. We asked one respondent, “Are there any times that you try
to do that and the kids just don’t want it, they resist?”
“He eats everything. He’ll eat all kinds of meats; he’ll eat all the vegetables. He eats
basically what’s put on his plate. He’ll pretty much finish his plate. He’s not picky, oh
I don’t like green beans, no he’ll eat it.... I haven’t had a vegetable that he don’t like.
(Interviewer: That’s great. What about the baby?)
She eats it all too, she’s not a fussy eater.”123
Another shared a similar story,
“I started [feeding my children vegetables] way back, you know, like we’re doing with
my grandbaby, we start like he eats vegetables already. He doesn’t have no problem
with vegetables and stuff, and that’s the key, you have to start young. You can’t, you
know, your kids get older now, you make a change and you expect, not going to
happen.”124
Some respondents noted that their children ate healthy food if an ingredient they liked (such as
cheese) was added to a dish they would not otherwise eat (like vegetables or meats that are baked
rather than fried). Several respondents boast that they “trick” their children into eating healthy food
in this way. One explained,
122 P72: Food Secure, Hispanic, Female, Age 21, 2-person household
123 P82: Food Secure, White Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 31, 3-person household
124 P25: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 43, 4-person household



59

“You hide the vegetables in the food. You get clever and creative.... You have to
start early with that. So you buy the spaghetti sauce with the vegetables already in it.
Now they have to eat their food.... It just became a habit.... I don’t generally fry
foods. It’s very rare that I’ll fry something. So they’ve always been accustomed to
having it baked [as long as I disguise it with something they like]. They eat pretty
healthy as far as that goes. They eat pretty good meals that are not a lot of fat in
them.... You trick them. That’s how you get them to eat healthy. You start young
and you trick them.”125
Though parents often want to instill healthy eating habits in their children, they also want to
treat them. And the impulse to provide a “treat” may override nutritional concerns—similar to the
dynamic with snacks. We asked one parent, “So what would you say are your healthiest habits in
your family?”
“Healthiest habits? We don’t drink soda. We—I drink a lot of water so I tend to
make her drink water, too. Yep. She loves juice.... So I try to eat a little healthy...,
but then I still want her to be a kid. So like every two weeks..., when I have the extra
money, I’ll treat her. [This] time of year we’ll go for ice cream a lot more and then I
always—every other Friday, we’ll go to McDonald’s or Burger King or
something...so she don’t feel like she’s not like other kids. [But] I try not to, you
know.”126
The Ideal Grocery List: Respondent Opinions
When respondents were asked what foods they would buy if they had an unlimited amount of
money, many claimed that they would purchase healthier food. We said to one respondent, “People
have a lot of different ideas about what healthy eating means for them; tell me about what you think
of that.”
“I have a brother that is [an athlete in] training so he is always preaching to us. ‘Stay
away from the sugar! Stay away the starch! Eat a lot of fruit! Eat a lot of vegetables!
Stay away from pork, it’s not good. Stay away from the beef, it’s not good.’ But we
still eat it because we can’t just afford all fish and chicken—all of the healthy stuff—
on SNAP. You can’t afford it all. If I could eat healthy I would love to eat healthy
because I love fruit and vegetables.”127
Like this respondent, most said they would like to buy healthier foods—particularly fruit,
vegetables, leaner meats, and fish–but could not afford to. A number specifically noted a desire to
purchase organic food that had not been treated with chemicals. Only one was able to do so
consistently, because her children’s father, who lived with the family, was a manager at Whole Foods
and received a discount. Another respondent, who could not purchase organic products with any
regularity, told us that if she had an unlimited food budget,
125 P7: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 41, 4-person household
126 P81: Low Food Security, Other, Female, Age 29, 2-person household
127 P16: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 37, 3-person household



60

“I definitely would buy more organic stuff. That would make a big difference. Since I
got hit with this sickness, [buying organic has made] a big difference. But it’s really
expensive buying organic stuff. It’s expensive. If it’s on sale I buy it, but it’s hardly
on sale.... So yeah, if I had an unlimited amount of money, I would definitely choose
organic stuff and just some of the stuff that you want to buy but it’s expensive;
instead of the rice I would want to buy whole grain rice or something, but it’s more
expensive than the white rice.”128
A few respondents said their food-purchasing habits would not change in any way with an
influx of additional funds, while some others noted that they would merely purchase more of
everything they already bought. Several fantasized about eating out more frequently, or indulging in
lobster or steak. Many said they would like to provide their children with more of the treats they
often begged for in the grocery store (sometimes fruit, but often items like frozen mini-pizzas or ice
cream).
E. Chapter V Summary
Respondents generally ate light breakfasts, simple lunches, and what they perceive as balanced
dinners; these patterns are less consistent with lower food security families, who often eat starchy
meals or are more likely to regularly skip meals entirely. Most made an effort to allow for the
purchase of small luxuries for their children, afternoon snacks, like an ice cream or meal at
McDonald’s every few weeks. Many families avoid sharing food even when doubled up. Families
almost never entertained, even on holidays, because they could not afford it. The exception was
children’s birthday parties or graduations; some parents planned ahead for months to be able to
afford the food this small celebration entailed. SNAP participants admit that their habits are not as
healthy as they could be, but cite the greater expense of more nutritious or healthy foods as the
cause.
At the same time, parents do try to adjust their children’s diets to include vegetables, and avoid
fried foods. They also strive to ensure that dinner is a balanced meal representing all the food
groups. Many claimed that their families had learned to eat healthy with the foods they could afford;
for example, a few baked their meats instead of frying them, many bought frozen vegetables so that
they could provide them at every meal, and some emphasized drinking lots of water. Certain health
issues were prevalent among our respondents at all levels of food security, including anxiety,
diabetes, and food allergies. Because of the limited choices their food budgets permit, many families
find it difficult to accommodate the various health needs of their members.

128 P57: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 42, 6-person household

This page has been left blank for double-sided copying.



62

VI. WHAT IS THE ROLE OF SNAP IN HELPING HOUSEHOLDS MEET FAMILY

FOOD NEEDS?

What are respondents’ experiences when they apply for SNAP benefits, how long do they stay
in the program, and what do they like best and least about SNAP? Most applied in the face of an
economic shock; usually job loss, loss of a partner, a pregnancy, childbirth, or health issue that
limited work. Most respondents reported that SNAP helped them significantly to weather the
financial shocks, and several referred to SNAP as a “lifesaver.” Some said that SNAP also allowed
them to purchase foods of better quality or more variety than they otherwise could have.
Respondents had a multitude of complaints about SNAP, however. Many complained that their
benefits did not last the whole month. Though SNAP was never designed to provide all of families’
food needs for all households (see Chapter IV), it is a common perception that the benefits ought to
do so. Perhaps due to this expectation, many families fail to set aside cash for food, and instead
earmark their cash for other bills. This is not surprising, since these households are often living in
the red.
Families also expressed frustration over their treatment by caseworkers, the overwhelming
paperwork demands, the inflexibility of the process, the opacity and, in their view, unfairness of
eligibility determinations, and the amount of time they had to spend waiting in line, often repeatedly,
at their local SNAP office to apply for and maintain their SNAP benefits. Another primary
complaint about SNAP was interruption, reduction, or loss of benefits without warning.
Respondents seldom received any nutritional information or guidance from SNAP, but SNAP
beneficiaries who were also WIC participants often said the WIC program was a valuable source of
nutritional information. Respondents shared a number of ideas of how SNAP might be improved.
A. SNAP Participation Patterns
Enrolling in SNAP
Past quantitative research has suggested that changes in household structure or economic
circumstances frequently precede entry into assistance programs (Mabli et al. 2011). Consistent with
this, most IDI respondents applied for SNAP as a result of an abrupt change in income or
household size or composition. For some, this event was childbirth, a loss of income due to a job
loss, loss of income due to reduced hours, or the loss of a wage-earning partner due to death,
divorce or breakup, or incarceration. Natural disasters can also lead to a spike in SNAP applications.
A few of our respondents in Texas said they sought food assistance after Hurricane Ike, which had
not only affected food availability and prices, they claimed, but also caused them to lose their jobs or
have their work hours reduced.
Length of SNAP Tenure
Our respondents have been receiving SNAP benefits for varied lengths of time, from a few
weeks to several years. Few have been continuously on SNAP; most report that changes in income
and household size have rendered them ineligible from time to time, and they have had to reapply
when times got tougher again. For example, we asked one respondent, “Tell me, when did you first
apply for SNAP”?



63

“I first applied when Destiny was very young and at the time I didn’t qualify. Then I
applied again and I only qualified for $16 because I was making quite a bit of money.
Then...when I lost my job, I think I waited about a year and I applied again. We got
it and I think I had had it for about three months and then you know she [went to
live with her dad] so I reported that she wasn’t with me so again, I didn’t qualify for
food stamps. So in July of last year, she came back. I waited, and I applied in
February...and I qualified.”129
B. What Respondents Like Most About SNAP
Several respondents referred to SNAP as a “lifesaver,” a testament to the extent to which
SNAP benefits affect the lives of the families we interviewed. Almost all respondents said that what
they liked most about the program is that it eased their monthly budget struggle—they could devote
more of their cash to their bills—and it helped them place more and higher-quality food on their
tables because it provided resources that could only be devoted to food and could not be traded off
in the face of other financial demands. With SNAP benefits to draw on, families felt less pressed to
juggle bills and other payments to make room in the monthly budget for food. We asked one
respondent, “What do you like the most about SNAP?” She replied, “They help me and how much
we save because that’s money that we’re saving towards either a bill or anything extra. With little
kids, diapers and stuff like that.”130 In addition, many reported an alleviation of anxiety and stress;
figuring out how to feed the family when cash resources had run dry ceased to be an often epic
struggle.
We asked one respondent who had had two recent spells of unemployment, the first without
any SNAP, “So let’s think back to the time that you didn’t have SNAP, and your unemployment
spell, how was that different than this time around?”
“I’m much better off financially [after my job this time], because [then] I had no
[SNAP]. The last time it was extreme struggle, because I had no idea. I mean food
was killing me....
(Interviewer: So tell me more about that time. So were you able to make bills in the
same way that you’re...)
It was hard. I was behind. Yes, I was seriously behind.... I was having to call and
make payment plans on all of my bills. And I was [seeking] deferred payment, “Can I
pay half this?” because it was a struggle—it was. Yes....
(Interviewer: Anything else that you had to do in that time to get through?)
No.... Thank God, I [became] employed. Someone hired me.”131
129 P66: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 64, 2-person household
130 P20: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 23, 4-person household
131 P43: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 54, 2-person household



64

We asked another, “So you applied six months back. Okay. What do you like best about
SNAP?”
“Well I just like the freedom of buying what I can for my son and not like having to
worry about, ‘Oh, I can’t afford to buy this because even though it’s better quality, I
can’t afford it so we have to go with the cheap stuff that’s maybe not so good for
you or whatever,’ so I just like that I have that liberty to be able to [buy the healthier
stuff].”132
C. What Respondents Like Least About SNAP
Too Much Red Tape/Overly Rigid Process
Many respondents complained that the process of applying for SNAP benefits was long and
complex. Some also claimed that the treatment they received when applying was demeaning. For any
given SNAP office, there is often a reasonably strict sequence for the filing of paperwork, in-person
appointments, mailings, and phone calls. Respondents claim that even small departures from this
sequence—even missing a phone call—can result in a benefit termination or a delay in receiving
SNAP benefits. In sum, the system is perceived as overly rigid—many claim that the smallest
technicality can result in benefit terminations or delay.
One respondent related the following story:
“Like when I applied for Food Stamps, it took literally four months to get approved
because even though I took all the information down there in their office, left it in
their box, that lady claimed she didn’t get it and then she sent me a letter that I did
not get and so it was like a back and forth thing and then they cancelled my
application and I had to start all over again....
It was bad.... It was crazy. I bought all kinds of stuff. I bought so much food; I ate
and ate and ate. That was the only time I did that was the first time I got Food
Stamps because I was hungry. You know..., I needed help but no..., they’re not
interested in helping you. They’re interested in just doing the absolute minimum that
they have to do in order to get you out of their office.”133
We said to another respondent, “Tell me about your interaction with the office or what you
think about the processes.”
“The process? It takes a while.... They tell you we have within 30 days but a lot of
times, the caseworkers...., they’ll take longer than 30 days.
(Interviewer: ...How often do you have to update your file?)
132 P30: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 29, 2-person household
133 P7: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 41, 4-person household



65

You’re supposed to do it like every six months reoccurring but there have a been a
few times like it lapsed and I send the paper back right away and I was like a day or
[so late]. If you’re even one day off, they cut you off completely. There’s no like
consideration, no nothing.
(Interviewer: And then what happens?)
You struggle.
(Interviewer: When will they consider you again?)
Not until—like they have 30 days to process it.... It takes like a whole month.
(Interviewer: So that’ll be one month that you don’t get any SNAP at all?)
Yeah and then because you applied for that month, sometimes [you’ll] get the
amount [you were missing] back, [but that] doesn’t help you for the month that you
didn’t have it. Yeah, I [may] have a lot of money this month but it doesn’t help me
for last month when I didn’t have it.”134
Many feel that performing all the necessary checks to ensure eligibility is warranted the first
time around, but having these steps/questions/verifications repeated each time they are recertified
or have to reapply for benefits is time-consuming and viewed as unnecessary. According to some,
the practices are even insulting. In the words of one respondent,
“Well, what I like most about it, of course, is the help. That’s one less bill or one less
expense that I need worry about. And what I like least about it is...they gave it to me
for a couple of months, then they said I didn’t qualify again. [They said my husband[
had made too much money. So they cut me off and I was off for like two months or
something. Two or three months. And then I told them his hours had gone down, so
I took in the new pay stubs to show them what he was making. And they said I had
to essentially reapply. I said, ‘Well, why is [my case] still open? Why do I get the
letters?’ They’re like, ‘Well, it’s essentially just like reapplying.’
So I was like, okay. So I had to make an appointment, go in, go through all this stuff
again. Bring in all this paperwork. And then I got it again for—this will be the third
month. And [they just sent me a letter that] it was time for a recertification again. I
was like, “I just did it. And you guys said—the paper that I got said it was good for a
year!” And they’re like, “Well, you still need to come in.” So, I was like, “Okay”. So I
went in and took in the new stubs. And he probably got five hours more [last
month] than he got last time [we applied], and now we don’t qualify. It’s
frustrating.”135
134 P50: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 22, 3-person household
135 P2: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 45, 3-person household



66
Interruption in SNAP Benefits Without Warning
In addition to frustrations with the red tape associated with accessing SNAP benefits, another
common complaint was that SNAP benefits had been interrupted, reduced, or cancelled without
warning. Program regulations call for providing participants with information about key anticipated
case actions. However, either these case action notifications were not always sent to (or received by)
respondents, or else the respondents may not have understood them. In any event, multiple
respondents shared stories of having their benefits reduced without prior notification. When the
changes in benefits occurred, this caused severe financial strain; in this small sample, benefit loss was
a common trigger of food hardship among those the survey found to be food insecure, as we show
in Chapter VI. Although sometimes these changes were made in error and were eventually fixed,
most changes were for reasons that respondents did not understand, which we discuss next.
Disagree With or Do Not Understand Rules
Many respondents were frustrated about what they felt were unjustified cuts to their SNAP
benefits. Most did not understand why their SNAP amount had been reduced or why they were no
longer eligible for SNAP, and claimed changes were unwarranted because their household and
financial circumstances had not changed, or had not changed very much. Others were outraged that
necessities like cars were considered luxuries and counted against them when their benefits were
tallied.136 For example,
“They count the fact that I have a car.... I have to have because of doctors and stuff
like that.... I have a machine under my bed that monitors my heart. And I have to
have a car if an emergency happens. They look at that as a luxury but in my mind it’s
a necessity. It’s a lot. It’s a lot. I won’t do it no more. I won’t go back there no more.
(Interviewer: And they didn’t understand when you were like ‘No, this is not a
luxury. This is a medical necessity.’)
They didn’t care. It took a lot for me to go there. Oh my God, it took a lot.
(Interviewer: How was that?)
Actually, I went off on them. I went off because I felt like it shouldn’t matter what’s
on the paper [about the car]. I’m not just a guy who wants to come in and try to beat
the system. I needed the help all the time. They wasn’t trying to hear it so I cussed
them out. To me it’s just not fair sometimes.... I’m not going to take from the
system if I don’t really need it.”137
We asked another, “Okay. What do you like best about Food Stamps?”

136 Technically, the existence of one or more vehicles does not affect the benefit level. However, it can, under some
circumstances, affect eligibility.
137 P73: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 38, 3-person household



67

“That you don’t have to buy [food] out of cash and you can use the Food Stamps.
That’s what kind of I like is kind of handy but [what] I hate [is] how they often cut
your Food Stamps knowing, [even] if you get the same income, they’ll still cut it and
that’s what I don’t like.... That happened a couple of months to me. They had
lowered it down to $200 something. I was getting $200 something and they lowered
it down a little more and I was kind of mad and I wanted to call them with like why
[when] I was still getting the same income.
[Then] I was cut off one month. That was—I want to say March. I was cut off
because they claim that I didn’t show up for my interview and stuff and I didn’t
know [I was supposed to] show up. They tell me they sent something to my address.
And then I went up there and I was cut off for that—they said because [I had not
reported a change of] address. I said [I] used to get my mail [forwarded]. Why is it
not getting [forwarded] now [all of a sudden]? So I got cut off and I didn’t end up
getting...my Food Stamps [until] like real late.”138
Long Wait Times at SNAP Office
Many also complained about the length of the wait times at their local SNAP offices. One
respondent told us about the frustrating process of setting up and waiting for an appointment at his
local office,
“A lady I know applied online. People had told me that they would come in and wait
for about six hours [so I wanted to avoid that]. She said that I could go online and
they would give me an appointment. Well I got the appointment. Well I had to work
so I had to reschedule my appointment.
So they rescheduled it for three days later. People were passing out in the office
because it was overcrowded in there. It was also really hot that day. I was standing in
line for three hours. Once I was seen I had to wait another two hours to see
someone else. I was actually there from 8:00 to 4:45. The supervisor came out and
took me into her office. Then they said because you do work, we’ll have to mail the
card to you. Usually they give the cards out while you are there. But that is only for
the people that do not have jobs.
I didn’t receive my card so I had to go back up to the office and told them that I
never received my card and the lady made me show ID and she gave me my LINK
card right then. I really didn’t know why they didn’t do this the first time. I did get
$280.00 on my card which was really nice.”139
One respondent noted that the long wait times at the SNAP office had a direct negative impact
on his wages.
138 P59: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 22, 3-person household
139 P62: Very Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 36, 2-person household



68

“Your [lost hours are] deducted [from your pay] each time you leave work to go over
there and to ask for help. You lose an hour of work and that’s an hour that the
company’s not going to pay anyone. I went to talk to them to ask what’s going on....
It’s a two...hour wait each time. It’s...always full of people looking for help and you
have to get in line and wait and wait and wait.... And each time that I would go I
would lose two hours of work or at least a two hours and a half, understand, and you
don’t get those back so your paycheck is lower.”140
SNAP Caseworkers Are Rude
Poor treatment at their local SNAP offices is a common complaint. Respondents were asked,
“What do you like least about the SNAP program?” The following response is typical:
“When you go to the offices...the people are rude. Not all of them, but it’s when
you go to the offices and the people, they talk to you in a [certain] way. When I first
got Food Stamps, the one lady she talked to me like I was just 10. Then the next time
I went in there I had to lay the line, “My kid don’t even talk to me like this so we’re
not going to talk to each other like this.” Sometimes they’re just too rude. I don’t
know if it’s because we’re the ones that need help [or what]. Especially the one over
there on [Name of Office], they’re rude and the one down here is real rude.”141
This treatment compounded many respondents’ sense of shame about not being able to get by
without government assistance. One respondent offered the following account:
“The thing that I like the least about it is that they want to pry into everything about
your life and make it so difficult for you.... I don’t care how much people evolve
and how open minded they are, it’s never going to be like you’re royalty because
you’re on Food Stamps or on welfare. I mean seriously I’ve never seen anybody in
my entire life ever run through the grocery store or up and down the streets going
“Oh, we’re on welfare. We’re wonderful thank God! Yay!” or going through school
going “We’re on welfare and you’re not”—like it’s something so cool. It’s degrading.
It’s embarrassing. It’s shameful....
There have even been people that I know that they said they would rather starve to
death than go through the embarrassment...of everything because it’s like they want
blood. They literally, almost literally want you to bleed for them in order to prove
that you are poverty stricken enough that you need this. It’s just completely
ridiculous. It’s like okay, I’m not going to come to you and tell you that I want you to
give me Food Stamps or money or medical stuff if I don’t really need it. I have these
kids. They need to be taken care of and that’s the only reason I go to Food Stamps.
Because if it was me by myself I would starve half to death nearly every day and

140 P74: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Male, Age 57, 5-person household
141 P48: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 19, 6-person household



69

night [rather than go to Food Stamps for help]. But I have children, they are my only
reason that I have food stamps that I go, that I apply, that I try to keep it.”142
The quote below summarizes the general attitude respondents have toward the SNAP program:
“So what has been your experience with the program...?” we asked.
“It is good; I have had some bad times. Most of the time it has done what I needed it
to do and it is there for me. It is a pain [...] to be honest. Some people are just hard
to deal with and a lot of times you go to the office and it [is] hard. Sometimes I feel
like [it might be because] there are a lot of people out there taking advantage of the
system. [When I’ve been there] there are people that are clearly on their phones
making drug calls and it just sucks. It makes it harder for the people that are actually
there and need it. For instance, why do I have to show you my birth certificate? I
was born here! What are you talking about? You are not going to give me this
because you won’t accept a copy? It is just a lot of paper work and being on time
with your deadline and meeting the requirements that they have set for you.”143
D. What Happens When There Is No SNAP in the Household?
Only 11 respondents reported that their SNAP benefits covered all their monthly household
food expenses. As noted above, SNAP was not designed to meet this goal. Respondents used a
variety of strategies (sometimes in combination) to acquire food once their SNAP benefits had been
exhausted for the month. Many purchase some additional food with cash, though cash is hard to
come by toward the end of the month, and families seldom reserve any of their cash resources for
food in anticipation of the SNAP shortfall. Others rely on support from family members, garner
food from churches or food pantries, or cut back on meeting other financial obligations in order to
have sufficient cash for food. Others reduce the amount and/or types of food they purchase and
consume. We cover these later themes under the “Coping Strategies” heading in Chapter III.
We said to one respondent, “...lots of people are struggling in trying to make ends meet in
order to make it through to the end of the month. How has it been for your family?”
“Since I’ve been receiving the food stamps it’s been a little better. I am able to buy
the food for 15 days; sometimes we’re able to make it to 22 days with the food
stamps that I get; then we make more groceries for the last week.
(Interviewer: What do you do in order to purchase your food when your [Food
Stamps] run out?)
I use cash, [basically].
(Interviewer: Out of your pocket?)
142 P4: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 35, 6-person household
143 P3: Food Secure, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 28, 3-person household



70

Yes, out of pocket.”144
We asked another, “...tell me about the last time that you lacked the money you needed for
food.”
“Well how do I tell you? The problem as I explained to you, last month they gave me
all of SNAP completely the month of April and this month they gave me only a
portion. For example what is the date? Is it the 15th?
(Interviewer: The 15th.)
The 15th and everything is gone. It’s all gone now from here to the end [of the
month]. I am now taking it out of my pocket from the little bit that is left from my
pay. And on top of that I need to keep aside a weekly amount for the rent and for
the rest of the expenses that I explained to you, the gas, the electricity, the cable, and
that’s is what is happening because all the Food Stamps are all gone now. We make
one big purchase and you know that with three children eating and everything is
getting used.... That’s how it is.”145
E. SNAP/WIC and Nutrition Education
Almost all respondents said that SNAP does not provide any nutrition information, but WIC
does. Respondents appreciated the nutritional information that WIC provides and said they felt their
visits to the welfare office to procure SNAP were focused mostly on paperwork, eligibility, and
benefit determination. This is not surprising, as SNAP caseworkers are not required to provide
nutritional education. Other sources of nutrition information were scarce, but some named their
doctor’s office and their own internet/television research. One frustration respondents shared is that
despite the nutrition information WIC and other venues provide, “healthy” food, such as fresh fruit
and vegetables, is simply too expensive or too likely to “go bad” before it can be used. Therefore,
they cannot always follow through on the advice they receive.
The SNAP Office—No Information, All Business
Almost across the board, respondents said that SNAP did not provide them with nutrition
information. In the majority of cases, when asked if SNAP gave them information about nutrition,
respondents answered by simply saying “no,” or “nothing at all.” Some noted they wouldn’t know—
they have not even been to the SNAP office because they applied online. Respondents sometimes
volunteered the view that the SNAP program does not care about them as people or about their
nutrition, and is concerned only about making sure they qualify and do not use SNAP for products
that are not allowed. We asked one respondent, “What do they tell you at the SNAP office about
what foods to eat and so on?”
“No way. They don’t care.
144 P31: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 30, 2-person household
145 P74: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Male, Age 57, 5-person household



71

(Interviewer: Do they provide any information about nutritious foods or...?)
Absolutely not. I mean, they might have information down there but they don’t
present it to - their main focus is to get you processed through the program and
verify the information you’re giving them. They’re not interested in how you spend
money. I’ve never had that experience where somebody actually sat down and said,
“We offer a food preparation program to teach you how to cook [healthy foods].” I
pretty much had to teach myself or learn on TV and the internet. No one ever sat
down and said, “Oh, you can save money - a lot of money if you do it this way....”
The Food Stamp office could be very influential, I think, if they had other
information or required that participants in the program take a class on how to
prepare food and how to, or if they offered coupons preloaded [on the SNAP card
to] encourage people...make the dollar go further.”146
Many respondents said exactly the same thing: that when they went to the SNAP office, it was
just “here is your card.” In the words of one respondent: “At WIC they tell you to eat a lot of fresh
vegetables, fruits and stuff like that. But at the food stamp office I don’t remember it was pretty
much just, ‘Here is your card.’”147
WIC—Very Helpful
In contrast to SNAP, almost everyone who was on WIC said WIC does provide nutrition
education; indeed, it is a required part of the program. Most respondents appreciated the
information they received. Some had met with a dietician/nutritionist there, while others had their
children weighed and lead levels tested. Others were required to watch nutrition/cooking videos,
and some were able to practice cooking healthy meals. We asked one respondent, “And what about
at the WIC office?”
“Really, really helpful and they care. Like every time you go, they will check the
baby’s weight. I really appreciate WIC. It’s a really good program.
(Interviewer: They weigh him each time you go?)
Yeah, they have a check [up] time. It was three months, I guess. You don’t have to
reapply, so they make sure that everything is right and documents and all that. They
care about your child’s health and the lead, everything. They help in every way you
imagine, like when I was breastfeeding, they gave me a pump and they gave me the
electric pump.”148
The theme that WIC is helpful in contrast to SNAP dominated the answers to our questions in
this domain:
146 P7: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 41, 4-person household
147 P36: Food Secure, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 19, 3-person household
148 P11: Food Secure, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 32, 5-person household



72

“Yeah, WIC they’re like a lot more into it. They give me like brochures about the
steps, the triangle and all that stuff.
(Interviewer: The food pyramid?)
Yeah, the food pyramid. And they tell me, they asked me questions about my kids,
what they drink, what they eat, how much juice or they give me tips about
vegetables, making it fun and stuff. I think it’s better at WIC because SNAP never
told me that.”149
Other Nutrition Information
A few respondents mentioned other sources of information, such as the doctor’s office, a child
protection worker from the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services, the internet or
television, a drug rehabilitation program, and a child’s school. One said, “The outpatient rehab that
I’m going to, they helped with that a lot because we’re, well we do parenting class. When I was in
inpatient rehab we covered that a lot for our children.”150 Another told us, “The pediatrician yes, I
love her. She’s Hindu and she has a lot of beliefs, like old school beliefs. And she’s like, ‘No more
bottle, he’s two.’ My Department of Children and Family Services social worker for the child [also]
tells me no more bottle.”151 A third told us, “The doctors always tell us about, to stay away from
certain stuff, especially.... Because the three of us, we’re all, you know, big people.”152
One respondent credited the dietician at a drug rehabilitation center where she received
treatment for substance abuse.
“(Interviewer: ...You said that you have a dietician [at the rehab center] and they tell
you to eat little meals frequently. What else do they tell you about?)
Tell me what to stay away from, like I can’t have sodas, the salt so I drink Crystal
Lite, which my family has all got to change over to Crystal Lite. They just tell you
basically what to stay away from, how much portions to eat, how much vegetables to
have and stuff like that.”153
Several said their main source of information was television or internet. We asked one, “So you
mentioned Dr. Oz and Rachel Ray. Where do you get your information about healthy eating?”
“From them. And then I read a lot. I listen to other people’s issues and kind of try to
fix my issues. [On Dr. Oz], you got people coming to the hospital will tell you what
they do, how they get to this age, how many cigarettes they smoke, how many they
149 P20: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 23, 4-person household
150 P27: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 31, 5-person household
151 P27: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 31, 5-person household
152 P8: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 32, 3-person household
153 P73: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 38, 3-person household



73

drank. So I look at my life and I say, ‘Ah, I can better that if I do this.’ You know?
You know, [and] I watch The Biggest Loser.”154
Another told us,
“Well I do a lot of my own like online [research] and stuff. They have a lot of the
healthy–the websites about health and feeding your children and stuff like that so I
look them up at those kinds of pages and just get ideas on like vegetables and stuff
and different ways to introduce them to him.”155
F. Other Food Programs
WIC was the only food program other than SNAP that our respondents participated in with
any frequency. Respondents had varying thoughts about WIC. As has been indicated previously, for
the most part, people were very positive about it. Several offered powerful testimonials about how
WIC is what got them through the month, and some talked about how they had enough food until
they lost WIC, and then no longer had enough. A few people had to discontinue WIC because they
were unable to make it to appointments. Some stopped participating because they did not like that
WIC weighed their children and gave them nutrition advice. For the most part, however,
respondents were positive about WIC, and for many respondents it was a major reason they avoided
food hardship.
We asked one respondent, “So what do you like best about WIC?” She replied, “What do I like
best? It gets you through the month.”156 Another answered that question as follows: “That I get like
the milk and the eggs and the cheese, like all the little things that I get, that’s saving me from wasting
on my food stamps. So that’s one little good benefit I have for it. And I get it until she’s five, so
that’s good.”157
Several respondents talked about how WIC had made the difference in allowing them to have
enough food each month, and how once their children aged out, things got tougher. One said,
“You know what I wish is that I still could get WIC. Do you know that WIC
program?
(Interviewer: Yeah.)
Cheese, cereal and milk. That would save me so much money, but she’s too old for
that. But yeah, that’s what I put back [at the grocery store] the most, is cheese
because right when I get to the end, I realize oh, $4.00, $3.00, you know?”158
154 P81: Low Food Security, Other, Female, Age 29, 2-person household
155 P30: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 29, 2-person household
156 P28: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 27, 3-person household
157 P49: Food Secure, Hispanic, Female, Age 24, 6-person household
158 P10: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 37, 2-person household



74

Another shared a similar story, “When I was actually getting WIC for both of my kids, it was
enough. It was more than enough, actually. I didn't have to complain; I always had enough food for
them. But now that I’m only getting WIC for one, it’s harder.”159
Most respondents first learned of WIC through their doctor, usually when they were pregnant.
A few said a SNAP caseworker referred them to WIC, and some said that family members told them
about the program.
Many liked the fact that WIC limited the type of food a family could acquire, because it virtually
guaranteed healthy eating. One respondent said,
“I think it’s a good program because they only allow you to get milk, juice, cheese,
and the healthy cereal that’s how I started eating the Honey Oats and all that. Beans.
I think that they give you peanut butter. So I think that it’s really good. And now
they give you like a $10 in your WIC card for fruits and vegetables only. So that’s
good.”160
Additionally, respondents also say the WIC offices themselves, and the treatment they receive
there, is also very positive, especially in contrast to the SNAP offices. One respondent compared the
WIC and SNAP offices, saying,
“The WIC office was actually very pleasant. Sometimes you go to the Food Stamp
office, you know, you have to sit in there and there’s all these people and kids
popping up. But, no, [WIC] just kind of send[s] you in and nowadays it’s, like, it’s
really nice. You just do things on the internet. You take all the tests with them, and
they upload the card and you’re good, you know?”161
Another contrasted WIC and SNAP in this way, “WIC has been pretty good because WIC is
fast. Like they—whoever handles WIC, they just see you right there. They’re always very fast, like
out of there. You don’t have to wait like no time. They’re very on top of everything. The people are
courteous....” Another explained that “Paperwork for WIC is also more—it’s simpler than that for
Food Stamps.”162
Even though the majority of respondents were positive about WIC, some did say that the
frequent appointments and check-ins required were difficult to attend and in some cases, were not
helpful. Some respondents stopped participating in the program because of this. We asked one
mother, “Have you ever been on WIC before?” She explained, “I signed up on it out here but I had
trouble, like I just got a car to where I can go back and forth places it before [I had it] I had
problems getting to my appointments and stuff. So I missed the appointment for the WIC.”163
159 P58: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 28, 3-person household
160 P34: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 28, 5-person household
161 P77: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 25, 2-person household
162 P28: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 27, 3-person household
163 P14: Food Secure, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 30, 3-person household



75

G. Respondents’ Ideas About How SNAP Could Be More Supportive
When respondents talked about food and SNAP, several themes came up repeatedly. First,
many respondents talked about food becoming just too expensive, and they wish the government
could do more to regulate food prices. Second, many respondents thought they needed more help
from SNAP, and said they wish SNAP took expenses, and not just income, into account.
Respondents also talked about the need for more information about nutrition and how to budget.
Respondents did not talk about these latter needs for themselves, but rather noted they felt others
needed such education.
Food is Too Expensive
Many respondents talked about how expensive food is, and how they felt the amount of money
they receive from SNAP has not kept up with other price increases. In fact, under program rules,
benefits levels are set to reflect food price changes. Nevertheless, it is useful to identify respondent
perceptions on this issue.
One respondent shared this view: “Well the cost of living has gone up so I think the cost of
living in Food Stamps should rise also. It should be budgeted on expense.”164 Another said,
“...the little bit of money that I get really doesn’t help. I mean, it helps but it really
doesn’t help because the food cost, the food is so high. The cost of everything is so
high so they’ve got to take that into consideration a little bit more. They can’t raise
the price of steak or chicken and expect you to still get the same amount. Our cost
of living jumps up a dollar when something else jumps up $3.00. Remember back in
the day $120 would have been a lot. Now it actually doesn’t mean nothing. It’s just a
little more reconsideration as far as the average person goes.”165
Another also commented on the rising cost of food, and the failure of SNAP to help families
adjust to these increases,
“These grocery companies should have a ceiling put on their products so that they
couldn’t be gouging people like they are. There’s no reason for a person to have to
pay $2-$3 for one stupid beefsteak tomato when one plant grows 50 of them,
especially when they’re doing it in July. That’s what’s going on; too much corporate
greed. All of the small mom and pop stores are gone and the big ones don’t [care]
about anything when they’ve got more than they can ever use in a lifetime
themselves.”166
Several noted that given their expenses, “just a little bit more” would help. One told us, “The
only thing that I could say is that it would be nice if they could give me little bit more to work it out.
But they’re not, SNAP is not really adding up the things that we pay, you know. They’re just adding
164 P31: Very Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 30, 2-person household
165 P73: Low Food Security, Black Non-Hispanic, Male, Age 38, 3-person household
166 P12: Very Low Food Security, Other, Male, Age 57, 3-person household



76

up what we make. It’s hard.”167 Another said, “Maybe if they keep it a little bit more on the food
stamps. A little bit more on the Food Stamps and yeah... $70, $80 more, just a little bit more.”168
Administrative/Program Improvements
Suggested administrative improvements were the flip side of many of the complaints about
SNAP. These suggestions include having a shorter interval between filing for SNAP and receiving
benefits, advance notice of any changes in benefits, clearer explanation of the rules associated with
benefits, and less red tape.
One respondent shared the opinion that,
“...the program should be designed a little better.
(Interviewer: Your thoughts on that?)
Just in general, the way that they work. I mean, they have no concern for anybody.
Like if you go past one day, I think I was like - I had it by 1:00 and I sent it at 3:00
and they denied it and I had to wait 30 more days.
(Interviewer: More flexibility?)
More flexibility in the program and just faster, I guess, because the 30 days [is a long
time]. [And] sometimes whenever you talk to the caseworker, they’re really rude.
They don’t care.”169
Several respondents suggested having some kind of play area in the SNAP office so children
could be entertained during the long wait times.
Finally, several talked about the need for classes about budgeting and nutrition. Interestingly,
not a single respondent who raised this issue wanted such classes for themselves; instead, they all
talked about seeing other SNAP recipients either wasting money due to a lack of budgeting/efficient
food buying and/or buying unhealthy food.
“Give them classes on nutrition - nutritional classes - because a lot of time people
buy food but it’s not really healthy food. And in the end, you run through it so fast it
doesn’t even matter if you have food or not because the calories that you are eating,
they’ve done burned off as soon as you’ve ate them because it’s bad food. So I think
they should have nutritional classes. And if, they should have weigh-ins to make sure
that you’re monitoring these families because I see a lot of people that have, I know,
I know the food - you know, people say you know who get Food Stamps because
they have three or four baskets of stuff. But I think you should help them with that.
167 P37: Very Low Food Security, Other, Female, Age 66, 3-person household
168 P45: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 30, 2-person household
169 P50: Low Food Security, Hispanic, Female, Age 22, 3-person household



77

You should be strict on trying not to make our children obese and sick, you know?
Childhood diabetes is not a joke. And these children are having heart attacks and
strokes. And it’s just, that’s, that’s crazy. I just, I just think you should, they need, a
lot of people need help. They need to learn how to [eat right].”170
Another offered similar recommendations: “Yeah. More helpful if they created a way that
would teach people how to make their dollar go further because the reality is they’re never going to
stop the Food Stamp program. If you’re going to have the program, why don’t you teach people
how to make those dollars last?”171
Two respondents had interesting, outside-the-box ideas about how to improve SNAP. One
respondent talked about possibly having coupons preloaded onto SNAP cards, both to save money
and to encourage healthier eating.
“If Food Stamps came preloaded with some type of coupons that are loaded by the
manufacturer for purchase...—coupons that already exist out there. Like with Sam’s
Club—you go into Sam’s Club and you scan your card...it automatically prints out
[coupons] based on your purchases, coupons for things you’re likely to spend money
on. Well, it would be simple for the USDA to do the same thing with manufacturers
so that people can automatically save money on food that they’re already
purchasing.”172
Another talked about the possibility of giving small SNAP bonuses near holidays like
Christmas, when people need to buy more food.
“[They should] do more on the SNAP to maybe, like...give an extra $5.00 or $10.00
onto your SNAP. I would say like every three months, yeah every three months to or
when it’s close to the major holidays.... I mean, it would help [during] the biggest
[holidays] and would be nice to give it at Christmas, when most people do the
majority of cooking.”173
H. Chapter VI Summary
SNAP recipients report varied experiences with SNAP, both in their interactions with SNAP
offices and in the help SNAP gives them to maintain a constant supply of food in their household.
Many say that, most importantly, SNAP benefits help relieve some of the pressure they feel to juggle
their financial obligations while keeping enough food on the table. Families at all levels of food
security told us that SNAP allowed them to purchase more food, and more healthy food than they
would otherwise be able to “afford.” This is because they must use their SNAP benefits for food;
resources in this form cannot be traded off to meet other urgent financial needs. Given their often
170 P38: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 26, 3-person household
171 P7: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 41, 4-person household
172 P7: Very Low Food Security, White Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 41, 4-person household
173 P47: Food Secure, Black Non-Hispanic, Female, Age 33, 3-person household



78

precarious economic circumstances, many claimed they would not be able to eat in the absence of
SNAP. Those who had recently lost SNAP benefits did often report that they skipped bills to cover
their food needs, but they also skimped on food purchases, skipped meals, and sometimes even
“starved”—went without any food for a day or more—as a result. A Chapter III showed, loss of
SNAP benefits is a common trigger of food hardship, especially among the less food secure.
At the same time, respondents frequently asserted that their SNAP funds carry them through
the first two to three weeks of the month, while the “end of the month” is spent scrambling to meet
food needs; households do not tend to set aside cash resources to purchase food during that last
week or so. A common perception among respondents is that food has gotten more expensive, and
benefits have not kept pace. The cycle of bills, income, and benefits is strained by the volatility some
find in their eligibility for the program; respondents who have been on the program for a longer
period of time gave accounts of repeated and abrupt losses of benefits. These unpredictable changes
in monthly budget calculations can greatly disrupt a family’s ability to meet their food needs. Other
frequent sources of frustration for respondents revolved around interactions with their local SNAP
offices. Caseworkers’ poor attitudes, the unyielding eligibility policies, and the interminable
application lines all contributed to the nearly universal perception that the SNAP program and its
employees lacked empathy and treated beneficiaries with condescension. These views contrasted
quite dramatically with respondents’ experiences with the WIC program, which was acclaimed for its
provision of nutrition information and its focus on health outcomes instead of eligibility concerns
only.

This page has been left blank for double-sided copying.



80

VII. IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
The study’s findings suggest several directions for future research.
Obtaining Detailed Information About Fluctuations in Household Expenses and Income
Although data is available about the income and expenditures of SNAP participants, detailed
income and expenditure data are rarely collected in the same data set. Surveys tend to focus either
on collecting complete, itemized income data or complete, itemized expenditure data. Furthermore,
the data are often limited to cross-sectional data collected at a point in time.
For example, the SNAP Quality Control (SNAP QC) data, used to produce the annual
“Characteristics of SNAP Households” reports published by FNS, contains complete information
on SNAP participants’ monthly incomes, but contains only limited expenditure data (medical,
shelter, and dependent care expenses) and consists of repeated cross-sectional samples with different
households interviewed throughout the year. The Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP) follows the same households over time and collects household income data for monthly
reporting periods spanning several years, but it collects limited expenditure data that is typically on
an annual basis. The Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE) collects detailed expenditure information
and follows consumer units (households) over four quarters. However, it collects only limited
income data.
The IDI findings related to the relationship between food insecurity and financial shortfalls
suggest that there would be value in obtaining more detailed information about SNAP participants’
expenditures and incomes just after entering the program and following them through the first few
months. This would allow FNS to understand how households reallocate scarce income resources
once they receive SNAP benefits to meet obligations such as rent, utilities, transportation, and other
basic needs. In addition, expenditure information could be obtained according to what was owed
versus what was paid in order to help explain how households reallocate income and the extent to
which households “juggle” (keeping some creditors at bay while others’ demands are satisfied). This
research might reasonably consist of a combination of IDIs to obtain input from SNAP recipients,
together with standard survey methods to obtain information about the actual fluctuations in
circumstances that occur over time.
Exploring Family Networks as a Food Coping Strategy
We found that a significant minority of the food secure households in the study take advantage
of frequent invitations to relatives’ homes for meals and receive contributions of groceries and cash
from their family and friends. Those who are less food secure were found to have less access to such
resources. There would be value in obtaining more detailed information related to households’
access to family networks and the role of family networks in alleviating food insecurity. The
SNAPFS telephone survey collected a limited amount of information related to the availability of
help from family, friends, and community members, but learning more about the extent to which
households use these resources and how this use varies throughout the month is a fruitful area of
research.



81

Food Access and Proactive Coping Strategies to Maintain Food Security
Many studies assessing food access limitations of low-income households have examined the
availability of food by store type (supermarket, grocery store, convenience store, and so on), or even
the quality of food (fresh produce versus canned or frozen goods) in the areas in which households
live. More research is needed, however, on how households make food purchase decisions within
this environment and how this relates to food security. In particular, more information is needed on
households’ proactive coping strategies such as carefully researching the best prices on particular
products, traveling to multiple grocery stores several times a month to capitalize fully on sales, and
carefully planning the meals around what is on sale rather than on the households’ food preferences.
We found that households who were the least food secure were also the least likely to engage in
these strategies. Data would be used to explore the extent to which these strategies help to alleviate
food insecurity.
Accuracy of SNAP Participant Perceptions of Food Prices at Different Stores at Which They
Shop or to Which They Have Access
Many of the IDI respondents reported that they spend considerable time seeking out the best
bargains for the food they buy. However, we know relatively little about how accurate their
perceptions of relative prices are. It would be of considerable interest to conduct a study involving
both in-depth interviewing and field work at a set of stores to determine the degree to which clients’
perceptions of relative prices are correct. The results could shed light on whether additional program
education activities could potentially help clients to spend their SNAP dollars more wisely.
The Relationship Between Physical and Mental Health in Needing SNAP
There is considerable evidence in our work that health issues, both mental and physical, may
contribute substantially to patterns of SNAP use—both in determining patterns of entry and exit
and also in altering the probability of long term use. However, relatively little is known about the
incidence of such health-related factors in the SNAP population. Research to fill this gap could
potentially involve a combination of closed-ended survey methods and also in-depth interviewing. In
particular, the former could obtain detailed information about health histories over time, and the
probing in the latter could obtain information on how respondents themselves believe that health
factors have affected them and their participation in SNAP.
Planning for the End of the Month, when SNAP Benefits Typically Run Out
One of the most striking observations in the current research is how many households fail to
budget money with which to buy food during the time at the “end of the month” when SNAP
benefits typically run out. A key set of questions involves: Why not? Is this aspect of the program
not communicated adequately to participants, or is it not relevant as households cannot do anything
about it anyway? Is this an education issue – in other words, do SNAP recipients not know SNAP
often is not supposed to cover food purchases for the whole month? What could the program do to
change this disconnect between program users and design?
Exploring “Time Cost” as a Factor in Household Coping Strategies
Also, one of the particularly interesting findings is the “time cost” that families have in
managing their food purchasing. Given the extensive nature of some families’ strategies for cost-



82

saving food purchasing, it would have been good to get a better sense of this time cost. Some
respondents described efforts that seemed to be the equivalent of having a part-time job in terms of
how time-consuming these strategies were, and it might have been worth asking about these time
dynamics more systematically.
WIC Versus SNAP – What Works Best in One That Could be Applied to the Other?
Many of our respondents seemed to feel that WIC could serve as a “model” program and could
potentially offer ideas for improving SNAP. This would suggest the usefulness of additional
interviewing of households participating in both programs, in order to focus more directly on
comparing them. Such detailed probing might also be able to shed additional light on reasons for
various attitudes expressed and the degree to which those attitudes are experience-based.
For instance, a study might explore in more depth the tantalizing observation from our work
that the respondents who felt that the substantial education component of WIC was good might not
have been talking about themselves so much as their perception of the needs of other clients. A
related potentially useful component of this potential study would be to examine the cost structure
of the two programs. The point of this would be to determine whether any perceived advantages of
WIC are due mainly to how the program operates or to how well funded it is on a per-client basis.
Improving SNAP
Related to the previous topic, it would also be useful to interview more clients on the issue of
how SNAP can best meet their needs. To be sure, some of the things clients may discuss in such
conversations may be issues beyond the control of FNS, such as the amounts of benefits or the use
of income verification requirements. However, IDIs, if carefully focused, might be able to identify
somewhat smaller changes in administrative practices which nevertheless would represent useful
changes in making the program more accessible to potential clients
Reasons for Temporary Suspension of Benefits
Many respondents in our study indicated that temporary suspensions of benefits for a month or
two (or even longer) often posed significant hardship for them and their families. Many thought that
their own actions were not responsible for the suspensions, (although experienced case workers
would be likely to argue that there is often “another side of the story” from the administrative
office’s point of view).
Building on the work FNS is currently doing related to churning, we believe that this issue
could be significantly informed through detailed interviewing of recipients. However, in order to
understand the whole picture it would be important for the researchers undertaking such a study to
have access to selected hard copy and electronic case records and, to some extent, to the relevant
caseworkers.
Such a project would examine whether a set of specific suspensions were the result of client
error, office error, both, or neither. However to achieve its maximum usefulness, the study would
also need to focus more broadly on the functional causes of the mistakes, rather than just the
“blame.” For instance, even in instances where the client was clearly responsible for having been late
in submitting needed material, an important question to examine is whether there were simple
changes in communication methods that could have totally prevented the problem.